global conflict is on the rise because
people are losing their minds if you are
eating a daily Buffet of information
that's been highly processed by social
media and the News you are going to
break your own brain just like how
highly processed food destroys your body
a junk food diet of triggering slanted
information is going to destroy your
ability to think well you've got to
train yourself to avoid traps and see
through the BS to that end behavioral
economists Dan arieli and I dive into
how to think clearly even in dangerous
times so the breathing ground for m
misbeliefs is
stress and I don't mean the stress of
I'm so
busy the stress is like job I don't
understand the world why is the world
not better to me why why are things not
working my way why is my significant
other so unhappy with me my kids my work
why is health I mean across the
range um and now what happens in those
condition of stress people people feel a
need for an
answer even even just cognitively you
know if we give people a a picture with
black white and gray dots what's called
White Noise right just dots and we say
do you see a
pattern the more stressed people are the
more they see a pattern when people go
parachuting the closer they are to
jumping the more they see patterns
interesting when there's violence in the
country the more people see so so we
need a we need a story we need to like
the the stress of what is going on here
we want to resolve
it and we don't need just any story we
prefer a story with a villain because
it's not our fault it's somebody else's
fault and oddly we prefer a complex
story to a simple one now now that's
strange right because usually we think
people love simple stories why do people
want the complex ones these people feel
like underdogs something is wrong with
me something is not okay so on feeling
that they're the only one who understand
the complex story gives them a feeling
of
superiority so we have this stress and
then people want a story with a villain
and a complex story and thanks to the
internet for example they can find
examples of that so that's the starting
point need for a story and and they find
a story the next part is the cognitive
part and it has confirmation bias right
we look at the information that is going
to confirm our
hypothesis we have motivated reasoning
we needed we can bend the story to fit
what we believe even if that's not what
the story is saying we can just distort
the facts and and then we have
overconfidence in in what we believe
even when it's not justified I actually
like the term corrosive information when
people use the term misinformation
there's this feeling that oh we could
fix it here's misinformation here is the
truth will fix it when you think about
corrosive you say people are different
on the other side of this and and
there's really no no going back so so
maybe I'll say a little bit about my
history with with coid and and this the
origin of this book um so here I am
beginning days of coid and the world is
crazy and people from everywhere realize
that social science is important how do
we get people to wear masks and how do
we do distance education and how do we
reduce domestic violence I sit there
with my laptop and two phones just
trying to help and I feel at the top of
my career I am like being the most
helpful person I can imagine ever all of
a sudden I get an email that says dan
what happened to you what's wrong with
you how can you be how did you become
this person and I say what do you mean
and I get back a list of links I'll just
describe one of them that link shows
pictures of me Hospital very badly
burned uh and then it goes to say that
because of my injury I started hating
healthy people and that's why I joined
the cabal and Bill Gates and the
Illuminati to try and kill as many
healthy people as possible and that's
what the pandemic is is all about and I
I get this and and lots of other links
and I I look at all of them and very
hard to believe right it's a here's a
view of myself that doesn't coincide
with what I think of
myself and I I spend a month trying to
argue with these people trying to give
them my facts and my side of things and
so on and of course I failed and I only
got things worse by the way a few of my
friends experts told me don't do it and
I did it anyway and then I went on a
basically a twoyear long um
adventure of visiting some of the
darkest cor corners of the internet
meeting with lots of people talking to
about 20 misbeliever in a very deep and
repeated way trying to understand the
mechanism I call it the funnel of
misbelief what takes people and and
change them in some fundamental way but
some
people trust themselves they see
something and they say it feels like the
truth it must be the truth and some
people question themselves so guess what
the people who trust themselves are more
likely to go the final of misbelief and
then there's a couple of other person it
traits interestingly uh people who are
complete the picture like something that
is really good for artist you see a few
things and you can draw connections and
you see things that were not there but
is as connected to the story all of
those things make it more likely that
people would go down the the finel of
misbelief and then the the final
component is the social
component what is the social component
so if we think about stress is the the
breeding ground and we think about
cognitive and personality is kind of
making it further the social is really
what SEALs the
deal so what what are the elements
within the social uh part and the first
one is ticism
and and you remember the story about
ticism the guy who kind of started the
the big research on on ticism
describes a day in the park he goes with
his dog to the park par um and he sees
two people playing frisbee they play
Frisbee they play Frisbee he walks by
the Frisbee Falls next to his feet picks
it up throws it to one of them and to
his surprise they throw it back to him
and the three of them for a few minutes
play
Frisbee and then they stop throwing it
to him and he feels rejected what now he
didn't know them he didn't come to play
with them but he felt
rejected and it's a very interesting
feeling so he he went to the lab and he
tried to recreate it how did he recreate
it he got two people to work for him and
one
participant and the participant came to
an experiment said look the experiment
is not ready please wait outside with
these other two people and these other
two people pick a ball and start
throwing it between the three of them
they throw throw throw the ball in one
condition they keep on playing for 10
minutes in the other condition they play
between the three of them for five
minutes and then they stop and they just
play between the two of them taking the
real participant and getting him to be
ostracized and now the experiment starts
and now the question is how does that
person feel and that person feels more
lonely and less connected less
optimistic about the world with less
confidence they're less likely to help
they're more likely to cheat all kinds
of terrible things so so when we think
about the the social element Oris is the
first part and and I don't know about
you but when I realize that I also
realized that when some people are
starting to go down the final of
misbelief I sometimes not by not in
intentionally I ostracize them
interesting somebody is is coming up
with a with a strange belief and I try
to crush it not crush it but I How Could
You Poss you know something something
like that now for me it's a little
joke for them it's probably a big
offense so so the social part start with
ticism and we've all done it and by the
way with cover we did it a lot um now
when people feel
ostracized what do they need supportive
community so where do they go mostly
somewhere online that gives them this
this
support now it gets worse why does it
get worse because people now part of a
group and they want to get to a good
position in that group how do they do it
by saying something
extreme this is where uh this term we
use is
shibolet and the the story in the Bible
they come from the Bible this word is
that there were two tribes that had a
very bloody war at the end of the tribe
each of them was on a different side of
the river but they didn't know if all
their people were on this side and none
of the other were on that side and and
these two tribes differed in their
pronunciation of the word
shibolet one of them said sheet and one
of them said
CET so imagine we walk around and I show
you the plant and I say how do you
pronounce this if you said it the way I
do
it everything is good and you get to
live if you say it the wrong way I maybe
chase you away or try to kill you and
and this term shibolet we're using it
for things that are not about what the
word is but about showing identity so I
ask you what's the name of this plant I
don't care about the name of the plant I
care about your tribal
belonging so now we're in a group and
now we want to show our belonging and we
want to be extreme and maybe we say
things that are not true but show
identity because if you just say like
the run of the male things everybody
agrees with you you're not showing
yourself you have to say something
outrageous
in order to show your true identity so
you know imagine that
you're um you know saying something
about being a vegan or whether you say
something about gun control or a gender
identity or whatever H people often say
things that they don't necessarily
believe but are signaling their identity
but then of course once they repeat them
they become accepted truth or new
standard and they start believing them
themselves
and then there's the last
component and the last component is
cognitive dissonance of course everybody
knows cognitive dissonance but just to
to to refresh let's think about
festinger's original
observation and his original observation
was about this woman who said that on a
particular date the Earth will be
destroyed and only she and her followers
will be saved because aliens would come
and take them
away and festinger wondered what would
happen the day after when the earth is
not destroyed and her followers realize
that nothing happened now if we think
about two types of followers we say
there's the extreme followers the die
hard ones the one that gave up all their
money and say goodbye to their family
and sold their homes and so on and we
just ready to to take off and this on
the fense followers the standard
prediction is that the Die Hard
followers will be the most disappointed
they would say she she lied to us and
they would just leave and the so so
followers we said you know we never
really believed it she's a fine woman
let's
stay but festinger predicted the
opposite he said that the dieh hard
Believers could not say to themselves I
was wrong they did so
much that they would have to adjust
their beliefs and and cognitive
dissonance is about if we act in a
certain way our beliefs follow now
usually we think that our beliefs direct
our actions I believe X therefore I work
in that direction but festing as show it
can also go in the other way which is we
act in a certain way then then our
beliefs follow and
that that's the last social component
which is basically saying that once
people have invested so much of their
time and social capital in a particular
misbelief you can't just say I'm closing
shop I'm coming I'm going back you
basically change so so in in in her
example with festinger the the Die Hard
believer the next day said she saved us
it was all thanks to her and now they
went to recruit more more people in the
same way that with
coid people have moved on to the next
thing oh you know it's not coid of
course the real thing was the World
Health Organization or the real he thing
is global warming or it's the
government's control with crypto or they
come up with with bigger and bigger
stories in moving in with it so so if we
think about it there's this
Machinery that basically Taps all of
psychology like this book is not
everything but it's almost like an
introduction to psychology textbook
because every element of our psychology
is
attacked to get us down to this funnel
of misbelief and the amazing thing is
not the people who go down that the
amazing is kind of the people who don't
you know what what what is the strength
that some people have
to to stay with our with our convictions
yeah that that's what I want to um cover
today so in the book you lay them out
super succinctly so you've got basically
the mind works in a certain way and this
is one of the things that's drawn me to
your work is I have an absolute
obsession with understanding how the
brain works so that I can Master my own
mind not be tricked by the cognitive
distortions my biases motivated
reasoning all that um and so what I
really want to get to today is okay so
we just walked through the problem now I
want to better understand like what is
it in the cognitive architecture that
leaves us this way um why do we think so
emotionally but why does it feel like
it's not emotional what comes first the
Intuition or the rationalization then
once we have that mapped out then we can
get into okay now how do I avoid these
traps so um I have the Good Fortune of
having read your books and uh arguably
your most famous book predictably
irrational basically lays out that we
are wildly emotional creatures we think
we're using rationality but in reality
we're not the rationality comes post Haw
that's right walk us through that one
how does how does the sequencing work
and then two if you have any
evolutionary insights as to why that
would have been advantageous I think
that'd be really helpful okay so so
let's talk outside of belief for a
second about about the the our nature of
making
decisions so emotions in general are
basically rules of thumb they're not
accurate they're not designed to be
accurate they're designed to dictate a
particular behavior that is almost
instinctual you're at the edge of the
Jungle you see a tiger you don't want to
take out an Excel spreadsheet and start
Computing anything you want a stimulus
response you see a tiger start running
you can figure out later that you're
afraid like that we we don't even want
the fear to come first we want you to
just start running and that's true for
lots of things we have this very quick
intuitive
system that gets us to act because
that's what nature wants now if you ask
the evolutionary question why there's a
cost and benefit right so what's the
benefit of figuring out the absolute
correct
answer what's the
what's the cost of making a mistake and
staying there for too long and meeting
the tiger right there's there's some
there's some very very higher symmetry
in that by the way that was the world a
long time ago it's not necessarily the
current world right in the current world
we can make very different mistakes
right evolutionary speaking if you think
about nature evolving our cost benefit
tradeoff it's not the same it's not the
same as now and another example by the
way with more about
misbelief is think about
Communication in nature communication
always has a true
signal what what do I mean by that the
the most famous example is the tail of
the peacock the peacock has this long
very dysfunctional tail in fact if you
take young peacocks and you H Stitch
long long tails on them they get eaten
faster right because the tail is a
handicap now now you say okay why why
would peacocks adopt a dysfunctional
tail that makes it difficult to to run
and escape and and so because it's a
true signal so if you're a strong veril
male you can
carry a long tail and you will not be
eaten because you're strong if you're a
weak peacock and you try to carry a long
tail it would not work out so if you
think about the tail of the
peacock it really really
communicates what kind of a male you are
and if you cheat you'll cheat for a
short time and then you'll be
eaten now now contrast that to
Facebook where you can say whatever you
want and there's not
necessarily real there's not a real
signal in it now we can do what's called
cheap talk hey I'm just saying like
imagine that we all went on Facebook and
we said how long is our tale whatever
the modern analogy you could say oh mine
is 10 meters and here look at even a
picture that that that supports this the
communication in nature by the way start
not from the The Entity that creates the
signal but from the entity that receives
it the female in this case uh the the
communication starts with what the
female would believe it doesn't start
with what the male feel they're going to
talk about or to communicate it starts
with The Listener and then the the
transmitter of the signal have to give a
true a true signal now um we're in a
different world we still trust signals
you know I don't know about you but my
first instinct actually it's true for
everybody but you know how gble we are
I'm very
gullible but but even the people who are
not that
Gible our first instinct is to trust why
do we trust because we grew up in an
evolutionary
environment in which signals were true
signals maybe not 100% but but to a
large to a large degree so we evolved in
a certain environment we we evolved in a
certain environment with costs and
benefit we evolved in the environment in
which emotions were very helpful
decision making in which signals were
very true and now we created a very
different environment
and just as another example think about
the
cookie uh we created a
cookie an optimal combination of salt
sugar and fat so much that we want one
and after we eat one we want to keep on
eating the next
one we but it basically uh hijacks our
emotions right it hijacks our taste bus
it's not a cognitive process where a
cookie manufacturer is saying look at
the cost and benefit of eating a cookie
they are attacking our emotions our
emotion developed for this decision
making quick decision- making process uh
but now of course they're being used by
other entities and by other entities you
mean advertising companies social media
apps everything everything right so um
you know imagine imagine you're a
supermarket and uh um you know I go to
the supermarket and I have a plan of
what I want to to buy but the
supermarket also has a plan and the
superet market plan is different than
mine what kind of tools could they use
to most likely get me to do what they
want and not what I want it's emotion
right it's not a somebody giving a
lecture on the benefits of fruits and
vegetables it's about sugar fat salt
that's the that's the mechanism so we
created a a societ iy that is very much
built on Temptation and
emotions everywhere not just not just in
social media and not just notification
on the phone and it's everywhere it's
it's an easier trigger to press than to
go through the cognitive route yeah I
think that's one of the most important
things that I've taken away from the way
the human mind works is that I'm going
to have the Intuition or the emotion
first and then I'm going to put some
sort of rationalization on top of it I
know that um people have sort of
discredited the the sort of trayer brain
but it certainly is a useful framework
to think through that I have a a more
primeval uh lizard Reptilian Brain at
the center then I've got my mamillion
brain which is very much the lyic system
its
emotions um which the interesting way to
think about emotions for me
is emotions are the way that the
subconscious mind speaks to the
conscious mind so if the conscious mind
is processing data in a faster and
vaster way it's not going to be able to
communicate through language which is a
much smaller bandwidth pipe instead it's
just going to make you feel something so
you're at the edge of the Jungle boom
tiger you turn and run even before you
realize what's going on you just had
this insane impulse to do it and you
take off running and then like you said
you'll worry about the truth of the
situation later and once I understood
okay wait a second uh this is
the impulses that I feel is a product of
evolution because Nature has one aim
which is to make sure that I Stay Alive
long enough to have kids that have kids
and so if it had to do that when I was
an amib boid and then you know something
coming out of the primordial ooze of the
ocean it's like on and on and on and
that's going to be the thing that's that
is consistent and Carries across the
different species that we move through
to become a human it's like okay that's
that's uh preserved because it's so
effective where if I'm going to
rationalize it I'm not necessarily going
to act and you'll probably know these
studies better than I but very
interesting to me that if you damage the
emotional centers of the brain a person
will be normal in every way but they
can't make a decision do I want steak or
fish and they'll rattle off all the
advantages to steak and all the
advantages to fish but ultimately they
can't make a decision because they don't
have that internal impulse towards one
or the other that when they have they'll
then give you a rationalization for but
the reality is it's the emotion that
allowed you to make a decision and you
layer that on at the end yeah so I'll
give you I'll give you two two other
kind of stories for Your
Arsenal one is the question of
fairness so um you know your parents
pour a little bit more orange juice for
your sister than to you and you feel
that there's something unfair or
somebody at work is getting paid
unfairly or get promoted and it really
and really hurts us and you say why what
is this where is this coming from and it
turns out that if we want to work
together we need to trust that fairness
is inside you right so imagine you and I
are going hunting together and then at
some point we have to do something
separately I want to trust that when the
time comes you will have an instinct
toward fairness that I don't need to
supervise you so on so now you you you
can see how you human for Humanity to
work in a group you really want
everybody to be concerned with fairness
because I want to work only with people
who are concerned with with fairness and
I'll give you another example and this
one relates to working from home and
working from the office how often are
you checking your credit score afraid of
identity theft or account breaches we
all use the internet every single day
for important things like Personal
Banking and remote work so why not
protect yourself with our sponsor aa aa
is an all-in-one cyber security service
that keeps you safe online Aura
identifies data Brokers exposing your
info and submits opt out requests on
your behalf Ora also monitors your
credit tracks your passwords for data
breaches and secures your online
activity with VPN and anti malware
protection you can try Aura for free for
2 weeks by clicking the link in the
description or scanning the QR code
there's this amazing research I still
can't believe it but I've seen it so sry
um you get people to meet new people
they meet new people they shake hands
just imagine a gathering and what they
see in the videos is that almost
everybody at some point raises their
hand and
smells their the other person what yes
now I I saw this and I said I've never
done that never I've done it as well no
yes these are lies yeah these are lies
go ahead what go ahead and take the next
social Gathering that you're doing
install cameras and observe it now here
is the thing
smell Taps the emotional Center
extremely quickly and
directly uh we all know that smell
predicts romantic
love with smell we can also predict who
your friends are going to be like you
know we think we don't smell well we
actually smell very well but we just
need to be close like you know we're far
away from the ground we not like dogs
but we have a very good sense of smell
and smell is incredibly
important again think about romantic
love and you would say there's something
about smell that is incredibly important
can you articulate it not really but
there's something very Primal about
smell and smell communicates genetic fit
I mean it communicates all kinds of
things so anyway there's lots of ways in
which
our mind works and we're unaware of it
and you know smell is just one of them
but it's kind of an amazing example
because you say I don't think I've ever
smelled anybody but you you you have
that's so interesting okay so so so
basically if if we say if if we go back
to the funnel of misbelief we're saying
there's this mechanism that starts with
stress and and everything we stress in a
brain that reasons emotionally exactly
and and not only that the brain can not
discern the the origin of the stress
it's not as if you say oh I'm stressed
because of my kids let me just realize
that stress is coming from there no
stress is kind of a general activity
that we have we feel stress it doesn't
matter where it comes from it
accumulates across the domains of life
and we just feel we need a story and an
answer and a villain and so on and and
this idea about
the brain being a Storyteller after the
fact is part of this right because if we
understood what the origin of stress is
maybe we wouldn't have this need to tell
it but we have this stress we don't H
understand it and then we have a drive
to tell a story with the villain and the
story needs to be complex So when you
say that we don't understand so take
coid I knew where the stress was coming
from I just didn't know what to do about
it and one of the things I found
interesting in the book and tell me if
you think this feeds into it is that it
it really is about control finding
patterns as you were saying you're about
to do something super dangerous you're
more likely to find patterns patterns
give you a sense oh these dots connect
and therefore I can understand it and if
I can understand it I can do something
about it yeah so I mean look just
intuition which I know to distrust trust
me after reading your book um but my
intuition would be that it it is more
that
I am going to apply a story and whether
that story ends up being accurate or not
may be important but I I'm gonna I'm not
I don't feel like oh I don't know where
the stress is coming from I will stamp
it with it's
this so so I think you you know at some
level that it's
coid um but but you don't really where
know where it's coming from so so is
this the unpredictability that makes it
it's it's it's the fact that again we
say we feel an
emotion but all emotions have similar
connections and we don't know exactly
where they where they come from so I
give I give this this story in the book
about one of
the early early research on
misattribution of
emotion and there were basically men who
uh crossed the bridge and it was a very
narrow shaking Bridge like a hanging
bridge and they met a researcher they
didn't know they were going to be in an
experiment they just thought they were
walking but they met this a researcher
and she met them in the middle of the
bridge in the place where it's the most
shaking and so on and she asked him some
boring questions about you know like
research let me guess she happens to be
attractive she happened to be attractive
MH and and then she said H by the way if
you want to call me later and find out
the results of the experiment here's my
number okay now nobody cares about the
result of the experiment um and they
compare it to a non- shaking Bridge what
happened many more men call her from the
shaky Bridge from the shaky Bridge they
basically uh have an experience of
something is shaking my my heart is
pounding my my hands are sweaty I don't
know where this is coming from right
knowing where the emotion is coming from
is not easy it's not easy so yes during
Co you could say it's co but is it
coming from work is it coming from
worrying about China is it coming from
worrying about the US economy you know
where exactly is it is it coming and
I'll give you one other example there's
a beautiful study showing that the
number of conspiracy theories about coid
have a strong correlation to how much
violence there is in the
country why so the more violent your
country the more conspiracy theories
you're likely to believe in the average
person is likely to believe in that's
right why because violence creates
stress and it's not as if people can say
oh this stress belongs to violence no
it's just a accumulates throughout by
the way if you think why does that make
you more like because I really I really
want to understand what is my brain
doing so one um Plato's Cave uh
simulation hypothesis like do you to me
the you are living in a simulation not
in that I actually think the world is a
simulation but your brain is creating a
simulation you only see
0.35% of the visible electromagnetic
spectrum or the available
electromagnetic spectrum you see such a
tiny fraction your brain is
oversimplifying the world in a massive
way emotions feel to me like no I can't
tell you I'm not going to react to the
quote unquote reality I'm not going to
try to explain it potential danger
potential mate whatever whatever um and
so the emotions are parsing these
incredibly complex things down into
something that I can feel and I can
react on immediately and if that's true
and I really am then in effect living in
the simulation of the reduced might be
the easiest way to explain it it's
simplified I'm just simp my brain is
simplifying the world for me and saying
to make this manageable so you're not
having to count the photons that reflect
off a surface in a given wavelength it's
blue or it's black or it's red you just
see the colors yeah that's a gross
simplification of what's really Happ
beautiful mechanis beautiful metaphor
yes okay so if we're trapped in that
bubble how do we begin to parse out what
we can listen to what we can trust
because the one thing in the thesis of
your book that we may disagree on is I
think everybody is prone to this I don't
think anybody escapes it I think
everybody is down some portion of the
misbelieving shoot you talk about
humility in the book which I think is
ultimately probably the only path out of
all this um which we will definitely
talk about because in the book you don't
give people the path out yes which which
is very horrible I am sorry about that
uh but we will we will for sure uh talk
about said so many things so let's let's
H let's kind of let me go back to them
so the first thing you ask is why why do
I say that the Mind cannot separate
different sources of stress why why
would it be efficient in a world in
which the brain start tries to simplify
things and here is what I think is
happening and you know it's hard to
reason about evolutionary but here is
what I think is
happening imagine that you your brain
wants to separate whether you in a good
place or a bad place stay or go
eventually is the
decision if it's about this is a bad
place I don't care so much why it could
be stress because of kids or significant
other or work and so on there's a
there's a signal of Badness that is
incredibly important and the specifics
are less important now in the modern
world where we have lots of control and
so on it's more important but if you
think in an ancient ient world the big
the big decision you want to say good or
bad Stay Stay or Leave and the and the
reasons for that are less important so
that's why you say okay there's some
Badness here I don't care so much where
the Badness and and just just go just go
away um so so the the the Mind basically
gets signals of bad things are happening
and they accumulate and you want them to
accumulate because if if let's say you
have two things you have family and work
if one of them is half bad and the other
one is half bad um is it really
different than all of them one of them
being 100% bad no the whatever is bad
you you want to just just change
it so we we just categorize the goodness
and Badness of things across domains by
the way the same thing is true for pain
if if you have a pain in your leg and in
your hand and you're not a doctor you
say leave that place and do something
else right so so the the Mind
accumulates across domains doesn't care
so much where it's coming from and codes
for the goodness or Badness of this of
this whole thing and now when something
is bad it says okay let's figure out
what's a coping mechanism and the coping
mechanism becomes this um in in the case
of misbelief it becomes like a bad
response and and and a metaphor to think
about
this is obsessive Compulsive Disorder so
so how does that work imagine that I
feel
uncomfortable going outside in the world
with my Burns right I worry and this is
true I I worry about how people would
react to my hand how people shake it
every time somebody shakes my hand it
kind of brings back the the notion that
I it reminds me that I'm injured that
people think about it differently they
don't know what to do and so so imagine
I have this um this worry how will
people react to me what will people say
and and so on um and I find the solution
and my solution is to wash my hands now
it doesn't solve the problem but it
gives me a sense of control and so on
and and then it reinforces every time
before I go home before I meet people I
shake my I I wash my hands I I feel a
bit more in
control that's the obsessive
compulsive mechanism right there's an
activity that gives us a sense of
control that helps us with something
else what happens in in misbelief I feel
stressed I don't know what to do um I go
online I watch a video of somebody being
the villain with a story and so on but
this is where the metaphor breaks down
because the next time I watch the video
I don't necessarily watch the same one
and maybe I watch it for longer because
that's the nature of videos maybe
there's one video leading to another
leading to another and next time I watch
another one it expands my cognitive
framework of how I understand things so
it starts with a sort of a healthy
response to a bad situation but then it
really goes
away okay so uh I'm going to give you
back very succinctly The Funnel of
misbelief let me know if I've missed
anything yeah so it starts with a person
is they're stressed they're getting
overwhelmed to use today's language
um in their overwhelm if you want to
supercharge this if that overwhelm is
being generated by Oster so that they
are now hyper sensitive to being left
out they want to seek the comfort of the
known they're looking for that pattern
that's going to let them regain some
kind of control that they have a
narrative that makes this all make sense
um they find people that resonate with
their take and so hey the JFK
assassination or Co just keep it to
something really
uh masks are ineffective I knew it I I
knew that they were ineffective and now
instead of being rejected by my family
who's like don't talk like that in this
house like that's crazy talk I get
accepted the world's starting to make
more sense and that feeling of unease
I'm now putting a layer of narrative
over the top of that that says that
unease was I understood something other
people did not understand they were
unable to face the truth these people
really get it and so now I'm being
soothed by being accepted I'm being
soothed by understanding what the path
forward is I feel better about myself
because I understand a complex story
that other people do not understand and
now I reinforce reinforce reinforce my
identity with this new group and now you
end up with people on Parallel paths
that's right or I think you called them
parallel universes or different
universes and and and you basically said
it but but there's the the cognitive
part right you choose which information
to pay pay to attention to a not and
there's the personality part that some
people are more susceptible to this than
than others but that's that's exactly
the that's exactly the funnel and now
you say when I think about these people
in our lives that have turned out to to
be so different it's not because they're
so different it's because there was
something in their experience that got
them to be stressed and looking for an
answer and they started going down a
path and it helps us understand better
what what happened to them hopefully it
will help us understand better when
somebody's the initial stage and we just
see the dangers and maybe we can still
help them there's one other thing that
is is worthwhile mentioning is that um
as a
society uh we have less and less
resilience um economic Inequality For
example is a big contributor to reduce
resilience right if you think about
what's the chances that you would go to
one of your neighbors and ask for for an
a
as economic inequality increases even at
the level of neighborhood people are
less likely to to ask for help and I
think we're moving into that direction
in general and Co specifically we we we
lost a lot of resilience so you're
saying the usual inoculation we have
against stress is support from other
people we had less of it during coid but
we also have less of it in
general okay
so H do I think we have less of it
I think that we have a more deranged
form of it because now people are
turning to social media and when I was
reading the book I thought one of the
things that we're really up against is
what I call velocity of information
because one of the notes I took when I
was reading the book and you never go
into this but it's like I have a base
assumption that people really are being
lied to so just because you're paranoid
doesn't mean they're not after you right
and so I think that there's also mixing
into all of this all the things you said
about being ostracized it em stress
emotionally sets you up to be ready for
this to go into the arms of the people
that accept you and you've got the
algorithms which literally funnel you
down a shoot so fast into the arms of
people that view the world like you yeah
um that that becomes just a a a greased
Chute so you've got all this information
coming at you some people really are
lying some of this stuff really is being
weaponized against people
and now you're able
to barrage people enough with enough
misinformation disinformation confusion
whatever you want to call it um
corrosive information you're able to hit
them with enough of that that the
average person isn't able to look into
the different claims it's coming too
fast and furious y they have to use a
heuristic uh rule of thumb just a fancy
word and as they come up with that
heuristic it's largely going to be based
on social proof so all of my friends
have said yeah uh or the news station
that I listen to has said or my favorite
podcaster has said whatever their rule
of thumb is and then you will more
likely because of the cognitive bias
around um I've now got some of my
identity tied up in this I've had
arguments with my family so now I'm
really to your point about the aliens
are coming it's the people that were
most hardcore about it that are least
likely to change so now the more that I
invest in this the more like I'm
motivated to reason in that way and so
now I'm cherry-picking the data I'm
seeing the things that I expect to see
and so this is where we get into uh
simulation Theory where what I I I'm
really trying to get people to
understand one simple fact about the
brain and that is you view the world
through what I call frame of reference
you have a frame of reference and the
easiest way to explain that is you're
wearing a pair of glasses that have
wildly distorted lenses wildly and over
the course of your life you and people
around you have shaped those lenses to
distort the world in a certain way and
your problem is you've confused that
with objective truth yeah and so we all
view the world in a distorted fashion
and we all mistake it for reality and to
me the the only path forward is to
understand that as a social species
there are there's an array of
personality types for a reason and just
to like think in political lines for a
second so you've got can I can I stop
you you're saying so many things I just
want to to to to stop and and and
dissect each of those so um so so so the
first thing you said and you said it in
a much more extreme way than I say in
the book is that this funnel of
misbelief is really
weaponized and in the same way that the
cookie is designed you're saying
everything we have around us is tapping
the the weakest part of you the human
mind the cognitive the emotional the
social proof the loneliness the social
support to get us to believe strange
things right it's
almost you're saying it's almost as if
the world has been designed more and
more to get people down the funnel of
misbelief we have all of these things
that are very potent mechanism to get us
to believe things that are good for
somebody else maybe but certainly not
good for us or good for some purposes
but not for real long-term wellbeing so
that's one important thing and you're
absolutely right and I think it's a
that's one of the big lessons is that
this we have created this
Machinery that has very undesirable
consequences and uh you know if the most
of the book is pessimistic because it
describes that look the way you describe
it is is even more pessimistic than I am
you use the term weaponize but it's a
it's a very it's to realize how much of
our psychology is being attacked just
tell you how comprehensive this
Machinery is and now you say okay we
have to wake up and do something about
it so that that I think is part part
number one and very important to realize
the second thing you said is about these
glasses that we wear and we have to and
we have to recognize them and for me I
use the term Mis belief to describe two
things at the same time one is a belief
in something that is not right that the
EXP don't think so the majority of the
people don't think so but the second one
is that we hold it as a central truth
and through it we view the rest of the
world so we're in California let's say I
hold the belief that kale is not that
healthy not the big deal maybe most
people in California believe that kale
is great I don't or or um what's the
other Brussels PR okay even even more
okay but but let's say I I believe that
kale is not that not that good not a
central tendency I don't view life
through that and so on but but the the
misbeliefs we're talking about that are
dangerous is not just that there's a
piece of data about kale that I believe
or not is are things that we start
believing is a core of my personality I
am a flat earther right so and and it's
not just that okay oh you know maybe the
Earth is flat maybe it's it's round I
don't I don't no no no it's a central
tendency now of my life and it's not
just about the Earth being flat it's
about
NASA lying to us and every pilot lying
to us and every government and you know
now and and I view the world through
that so now when something bad happens
it's I don't view it objectively I view
it through that through that lens so so
this this understanding in and it's
easiest with sports right if you I don't
know are you a fan of some sports team
um not really buts analogies all the
time so go for it you know so you have
Team a and Team B and you're a fan of
Team a and Team B is your rival and you
have a game and the referee is calling
against a call against your team you you
can't see it objectively you can't see
it in the same way that somebody El feel
you have to see the game as you know the
referee is evil vile blind uh somebody
something something like that um and
it's true how we view our kids and all
kinds of things like
that and
um and you're absolutely right that
these these glasses that we have it's a
good metaphor and color everything color
everything and to the extent that we
adopt these negative glasses they have a
lot of Downstream
consequences so uh if we adopt the
glasses that um everybody out there is
with a good
intention everybody wants our benefit
everybody wants to make the world better
that's probably not correct but but
think about those glasses compar to a
glass that everybody is against me um
both are incorrect there probably some
people against you some people and so on
but the negative one can have much more
dire consequences for you and for
society right because now if you look at
everything through a negative lens
there's lots of things that you would
not participate in you would not help we
we can't get collaborative action all
kinds of things all kinds of things
happen and and you mention this this
notion of intellectual humility and the
term I don't like so much but that's
what that's what interesting why don't
you like the term feels so politically
correct to me oh I'm
intellectual I have I have intellectual
humility
um I I think it's really about the
ability to hold multiple hypothesis in
mind and not being convinced too quickly
and I also think it's about reducing the
gap between confidence and knowledge
because the moment you you hold multiple
things in mind you basically say I don't
I don't know now you're talking about
the Dunning Krueger effect specifically
so so there's another version of it that
one is is also a great one there's
another version of it called the
illusion of explanatory depth and it
it's similar but it's different and and
the way I demonstrated it uh it's been
demonstrated a lot but but my version
was with a flash
toilet I would go to people and say do
you understand on a scale from let's say
one to 100 how well do you understand
the flash toilet people gave a number
usually a very high
number and then I would say great
luckily for you we have all the pieces
of a flush toilet why don't you assemble
it what do you think is the percentage
of people who manage to assemble it
effectively zero exactly zero including
a daughter of a plumber she was actually
um but but that's not the important part
the important part is you go back to
people and you say how well do you
understand flash toilet and people say
not so much and and that's really
interesting
because it's very easy to say okay we
can teach people something and they will
learn maybe but in the illusion of
explanatory depth we don't teach people
anything we just ask them to
explain and and what they show is that
when you ask people to explain something
in a bigger depth most people say oh
maybe I didn't understand that as much
as I thought I would by the way if you
want if you want party tricks not party
tricks but if you want a way to talk
with your relatives and friends over the
holidays who are
misbeliever if you try to attack them
you know it's not going to work right
you're just going to oze them it will
only make things worse but going at them
with the illusion of expl planetary
depth is actually quite useful you say
that the Earth is flat help me
understand how it works and what about
the other planets are are they all are
they all flat and so what happens to fly
I mean just help me understand not not
you're wrong help me
understand and there's another nice
trick which is to say
uh what would convince you to change
your mind right when you're not saying
this you're saying you tell me what
would what would convince you those two
things are good for the
cognitive uh for the cognitive component
of of that to kind of reduce people's
confidence because you're absolutely
right if people are if we think that
misbelief or whatever is is about
adopting something very deeply
inside with high certainty and using it
as a lens to view everything else that's
what you want to stop
like if people say you know Co I'm 90%
sure that it's this and 10% sure 10%
that maybe it's not I don't think I
don't think anybody would become that
extreme I don't think anybody would
create death rates I don't think anybody
would ER start to CH to change the World
Health Organization I don't think people
would start organization will get people
to stop immunizations or stopping can I
see now people people going against
standard Health Care practices in all
kinds of illnesses right people people
are going and off the edge with their
the distrust of the medical
establishment right the moment you hold
two hypothesis and you say I'm not so
sure that's incredibly healthy not easy
to get to especially under stress where
people want an
answer so here's how I have gotten to
that in my life let me know if there's a
better
way I need to know what I need to know
what's true I understand that truth is
fishlyn the world most of what we
recognize as truth is perception and
interpretation so I see what I expect to
see so I'm over here looking at
something you might be looking at the
same thing but we are almost certainly
seeing different things having different
experiences and then on top of that
we're interpreting it so I walk away
seeing something and believing one thing
you walk away seeing something and
believing something else in the book you
give a great example of uh sleep
paralysis or night terrors and now some
people interpret that as abduction by
aliens and then other people like if
that happened to me I'd be like the one
thing I can tell you it was not an alien
abduction it doesn't fit my worldview
right so I would not be able to
accommodate that no matter how real it
felt I would walk away being like well
it was crazy I can't believe how much it
felt like I was levitating and like
there were aliens around the bed or
whatever all the normal signs are but
because my interpretation of that event
has to filter through my entire world
view I'd walk away going wow that's a
crazy trick of the brain to feel like
that this sounds like night terror sleep
paralysis whatever and so I'd walk away
with that but you might have that same
experience or somebody else and be like
100% I was abducted by aliens there's
literally nothing you could tell me that
would make me believe otherwise I was
there I experienced it it's real I can
pass lie detector test so on and so
forth okay so that's how we end up with
these just wildly Divergent senses of
truth it's not even necessarily because
let's take the hard example it's not
that anybody's a lying it's that they
looked at the same thing and they walked
away with wildly different conclusions
because we are all in our own simulation
which is based around our distorted
glasses and so we're legitimately
attempting to see the truth and we can't
okay so so just just to give to bring it
back so somebody gets um an announcement
from the CDC two people get announcement
from the CDC and one person says the CDC
is always lying and therefore it's the
opposite from what they're saying and
the other person says I trust the CDC
and you have the same piece of
information interpreted in very very
different ways and and then um lots of
other examples like this absolutely for
sure so now the question becomes is
there anything that we can call
objective truth and I would say there is
the only thing that I'm supremely
confident is physics so but even physics
we don't have a unifying Theory yet so
we know we're off by some margin but
that's at least it predicts and when I
think about in my own life okay truth
matters because it allows me the closer
I get to truth the more I'm able to
predict the outcome of my behaviors as
an entrepreneur that's incredibly useful
because my business lives or dies by my
ability to say if we do this then we
survive if we you know do something else
then we might fail so I'm always trying
to get as close to ground truth as
possible the problem is going back to
the phrase you don't like intellectual
humility so there's something I call the
physics of progress if you want to get
better at something there is a Formula
it's essentially the scientific method
recontextualize for whatever you're
trying to get good at but you know your
end goal you recognize the obstacle that
stands between where you are and the
goal you're trying to achieve and then
you're going to come up with a
hypothesis of what you would need to do
to overcome that obstacle to get to your
goal then you're going to try it it's
going to fail to some degree almost
certainly now in that moment if you're
willing to be honest okay this is all my
fault all 10 fingers back at me what did
I do wrong that if I changed I would get
a better result and in that is where all
the cognitive distortions all the
self-identity all the anxieties about
not being accepted uh thinking less of
yourself all the psychic pain that comes
with realizing I'm not as smart as I
thought I was what you build your
self-esteem around comes crashing in on
you and so in that moment of analyzing
the data and saying why didn't this work
all the sins of humanity can be found
yeah by the way with the with the I like
the fact that use the scientific um
approach the
methodology running two conditions would
be very
helpful right because if you run one
experiment one condition of the
experiment it's not always clear if it's
successful or failure or if it could be
even better m but running two
experiments actually is also a very good
thing for saying I so much I don't trust
this and I don't know that I'm going to
put in two hypothesis at the same at the
same time so you know I I'm not sure
whether physics is you know yes physics
is is not social science there's a big
difference
but the physics part of it doesn't help
me because I want to predict human
behavior like you know physics is still
a different a different topic and I I
want to predict understand improve The
Human Condition and my Approach and you
please tell me honestly if it comes out
in my books or not I I feel that I'm
like a tour guide that is sharing
information of what I think is the best
knowledge right now but I try very much
not to say that this is the there'll be
no after that that that I'm basically
saying here is the best ability what I
think we know and understand the world
right now but it's certainly possible
we'll learn more we'll change our
opinion things will be more complex and
and by the way in social science things
can change because technology changes
the world of attention before social
media is different in the world of
attention after social media different
before the phone then after the phone
loneliness I mean lots of things are are
different but I think that the right
approach is to
say what are the what are the things
that I hold to be most likely to hold in
most circumstances in a general way but
to
basically be open-minded to keep
examining them so and and that's one of
the risks so think about something like
education what do you mean that's one of
the risks the one of the one of the
challenges is that we don't keep
examining them right so think about
education we know very little about
education we spend a tremendous amount
of GDP on ucation if you ask what do we
know truly about what get kids to be
better educated we know very little we
know very little and it's because we've
done very few experiments right what
parents will want their kids to go to a
randomized control trial on education so
we do correlational studies but we
hampering our own ability in terms of in
terms of learning so what on that
because what I want to get into one I
want to know how you establish truth so
I laid out my formula truth is that
which when I act in accordance with that
it allows me to accurately predict the
outcome of my behaviors that is to me
true if it isn't true I won't get the
right outcome if it is true then I will
and then
two if you want to use education as an
example like what would you do how would
you because to me you just plug it into
the physics of progress like it is
self-evident how you solve these
problems to me yeah um so
so so let's let's talk about I I sort of
agree with your first point I I would
just make the the barrier lower than
accurate um I would say that for me
truth is that these tools principles and
so on help me predict better than
without them okay but I accurate is kind
of a high a high bar right so let's say
let's say we want to
predict um let's say we have a new
computer
game and um we want to we want to
predict how excited people would be
about it and we have some kind of
Economics within within the game there's
kind of an economic system uh within
that game and I say hey we have this
principle of loss aversion people hate
losses more than we enjoy gain means I'm
willing to predict that if we have a
system where people are afraid of losing
that there's an opportunity to
lose H they will be more motivated
to for the game and more motivated to
prevent loss than they would be
motivated to to gain I'm not I'm not
saying I'm not I'm not willing to give
you a specific accurate oh they will
play for 17 minutes instead of 10 but
the direction will be the direction that
it will be it will be positive so
so by adding this element to our
understanding of the mechanism we would
be better able to predict so I'm with
you there just I'm accuracy for me is a
is a little high yeah that's fine I
don't I don't know that we're
necessarily going to get to um the Final
End State everything is sort of
incrementally in the direction but what
I'm saying is you have to say I expect
this outcome and I either got that
outcome or I didn't or it was
directionally headed towards that or it
wasn't absolutely which is where
everybody fails they either don't have a
metric by which they judge and so then
it becomes we're arguing
about what we think is true with no
method to prove what is true and so we
get into these deranging battles so that
people say that the Earth is flat okay
that that one just seems um very simple
there are a set of tests where you can
predict okay if the Earth is flat it
makes these predictions go run a test
did the prediction come true or not
there's a fantastic video of a flat
earther Who in real time re realizes oh
I was wrong because he's like if the
Earth is flat I can set up posts at a
given height shine a light through it
and the light will reach it'll go
straight across if the Earth is curved
then the light will be you know whatever
uh in in a given place and it was in the
place you would expect if the Earth
Earth was curved and so you see him be
like whoa okay but that that to me is
exactly how you prove all this stuff
yeah so so we are we're together on this
and and there's actually the running an
experiment is one one approach and
basically specifying your prediction is
another one up front right it it's it's
not just about if if we think that
rationalizing after the fact or or you
know motivated reasoning is a big Force
you want to be very clear upfront about
what your predictions are right because
you don't want to be in the situation
afterwards oh yeah that's really what I
meant yep you go out of your way in the
book write it down because you're all
going to think that you were closer than
you were that's right so that's that's
absolutely important and and and a very
important mechanism to to move forward
but but the second part in all of this
is the level of uncertainty that we need
to accept in a very deep level how much
we don't know and that's very very tough
it's very very tough to just because
humans don't like uncertainty that's
right we don't like uncertainty
um you know you can think about all
kinds of professions where we think
about politicians right when do you
think a politician could be elected if
they said look um the question about how
to move the US economically forward is
very complex there's lots of options I
don't know who what will be the
composition of the Senate and the house
and I'm not sure what they'll let me do
or not do but trust me I'll do my best
given the circumstances and the
political climate and our economic
opportunities and so on not going to
work right how many people would say yes
let's let's do that we don't like
uncertainty there's something very very
strong about we like confidence we like
stories we like um things that we think
are facts uh very very hard to live with
it so when we
say intellectual humility it's a it's a
tough State it's we need to understand
that yes it's nice to do but it's very
very tough to to actually live in that
mhm Okay so let me ask a sort of nakedly
gross question do you think the average
person is capable of the um intellectual
humility that will be required to figure
out what is true and what is
false no okay no and I don't think it's
just the average I think I think it's
going these are very tough questions
they're very very complex the world is
becoming more complex so
um like you know when I when I grew up
up there was one school there was no
question of which school to go to there
was the school we we went to H for my
kids it's like you need a masters in
trying to understand different schools
um healthc care is unbelievably complex
I mean the the world thankfully is
incredibly interesting incredibly rich
but also incredibly confusing and you
know what what are we expecting people
to be like we're expecting people to be
experts in every one of the many aspects
of their of their lives how can they
it's
impossible so
not not because of I I doubt people's
ability and don't you expressly doubt
their ability I'm saying I also doubt
their ability but saying even even
without their even without doubting
human ability just the the sheer
demands that we have on people is
completely unacceptable so people need
to make very very simp simplifying
assumptions um I'm you know you and I
are in a privileged position let's
say tomorrow we we're diagnosed with
some medical condition we would find the
time to read the literature we would
talk to experts we we
would we would become slight expert in
it
quickly um but but you need a big
trigger with a real incentive to do that
we have to make a ton of decisions in
places that we are no experts on and
we're not going to spend the time and we
have to use some some mechanism so would
the majority of the people and the
majority of the topics be able to
separate truth from not truth
no no and but it doesn't mean that we're
doomed why because I think that the
Ingenuity of society is not about
counting or on human nature it's about
designing a better
world so imagine that I I came to your
house every morning by the way beautiful
house I came here every day and I
brought a a tray of fresh donuts and
croissant how healthy would you be at
the end of that year exactly the same
you would you would refuse all of them
every single time okay I'm not going to
run it because you live in LA and I'm
very open it's interesting because
you've mentioned this before and I
thought oh God if you asked me that
question he's not going to like the
answer I get where you're going but this
also leads to what I'm trying to get to
so I want to show people the way out of
this um make your point though I don't
want to do so we'll talk about your your
personality in a minute but most people
would be less healthy at the end of the
year but but the point is because the
default option is bad because because
when we're faced with temptation and we
know that donuts and croissant are not
the the good thing for us but when we're
faced with temptation we have a really
hard time resisting it I'm not saying
people would fail all the time but it
would fail enough to to make them less
less
healthy but our strength as as humanity
is to design the world in a different
way we can design the world so nobody
comes in the morning to serves donuts
and croon we can design the world so the
notifications on our phone are
not popping up all the time we can
design the world so that we don't
confuse um something funny with
something with something true on the
internet we can design the world to
reduce stress we can design the world to
increase resilience we I mean there's
lots of things we can do so if you say
let's let's take this human mind and say
how capable is this human mind to deal
with the modern world not so much how
cap how sensitive is this human mind for
all kind of interferences that would
derail this human from their long-term
objective very very hard what can we do
the only answer is so so your approach
is like the Dal Lama you say I'm going
to fix myself I'm going to to train I'm
going to think I'm going to be more
rational I'm going to do all kind of
things going to work for a few people a
little bit of the time I think the real
solution is to try and design things in
a better way so
um saving let's design better savings to
health let's design Better Health
approaches in all of those things I
think once you design something
everybody can use it uh but to count it
everyone will figure out their own way
of how to do things better that's a
that's a that's a tall order do you ever
feel like you're hustling as a Creator
working non-stop to grow your online
business but you never hit your Revenue
goals kajabi is the tool you need to
make more money more ways and more
efficiently it's a One-Stop shop to turn
your skills passions and experiences
into enriching online courses exclusive
membership sites thriving communities
personalized coaching subscription
podcasts and more all of which is
underpinned by robust analytics
marketing tools third-party Integrations
and easy payment options and with kajabi
you have 100% control with free
templates that you easily customize even
if you're not Tech savy Right Now kajabi
is offering a 30-day free trial to start
your own business just go to kajabi.com
impact Theory that's K Aja a bi.com
impact Theory go to kajabi.com
impact Theory to earn more doing what
you
love okay so you
this is such a big problem and I do not
I'm going to I like to present very
aggressive very clear propositions but I
want everybody to understand I distrust
myself I assume I'm wrong I assume my
default assumption is that I'm laying
something out that may be directionally
correct but is going to fail in some way
and I need to be constantly seeking
disconfirming evidence with that I will
say that the reason this problem scares
me and the reason that I wanted to do a
show on this particular particular
problem is because I believe that people
are trapped by the way that their mind
works and that we have entered a hyper
dangerous period of human evolution
where the rate of information is coming
at you so fast that whether people are
intending to manipulate you or not
they're just like a social media app is
just designed to keep you on the app for
the longest amount of time but that
might be by enraging you it might be by
scaring you it might be by whatever and
so that's not necessarily in your best
long-term interest now we haven't even
defined best long-term interest and if I
have a hundred guests on the show and I
ask them each to say what's your
Northstar they're going to be different
which is already crazy minus fulfillment
which is working very hard to gain a set
of skills that allow you to serve not
only yourself but somebody
else so that to me is what everybody
should be aiming at but not everybody's
going to agree with that you can already
debate that so I like I like your
defition
thank you but I know not everybody
agrees with that so now we have we don't
even know necessarily what we're aiming
for we don't have the same level of
distortion in our glasses or they're
certainly not distorted in the same way
so we're not aiming at the same thing we
do not view the world the same way we
are all subjected to emotional reasoning
and then adding the logical thing on the
backside of it and we we are living in a
society where people are trusting the
government less and less and as you said
distrust begets distrust so you get into
a downward spiral of just distrusting
everything but one of my base
assumptions which again I'm very open to
being wrong but one of my base
assumptions is that there really are
people trying to manipulate me and there
really are people that are lying to me
and maybe they're even doing it because
they think they have my best interest at
heart but the second you try to impose
something top down instead of letting it
come bottom up and this is the one thing
that worries me about your solution
where we depending on how you let the
engineering happen to a better world if
you force that from the top down with
the smart people you're you're going to
end up with a [__] disaster whereas
if you clear the way for people to run a
bunch of experiments which may and this
wounds my soul it may need to be at the
country level so that different
countries can do wildly different
experiments and hey whatever country
wins wins but part of winning is going
to be either economically icing you out
or dropping bombs on you and so man any
one person that can be a very rough ride
to see because again what's your
Northstar what are we actually aiming at
for some it might be just our GDP is
higher than yours or more people trade
in our currency than yours so it gets
very weird very fast so we're good so so
so I think yes there are lots of
differences but there's also things we
agree on I think everybody's agrees that
a trust in society is incredibly
important right some people think it's
one of the most important contributors
to GDP some people think it's less than
the most important but everybody agrees
that it's important and I think the idea
that countries need to take Collective
actions is also true I think the idea
that people should obey the laws and
that creates lots of a virtuous cycle is
is also clear there's some things we
agree I you're right it what's the North
Star we will probably have some
different opinions on but there are some
some some other General things that we
would that would we would agree I also
agree with you that that the way we have
designed Society I think not
purposefully but the way we've designed
Society is to basically kind of pray on
our weakest Point as as human beings
it's praying around emotion it's praying
on our impulsivity it's praying on our
trust in information it's
praying on our loneliness praying on all
kinds of things and it's this is the
Machinery that is incredibly dangerous
now H the question is how do we get out
of this I I don't think there's one
solution so it's not as if I think oh
you no it's just government
regulation I think as individuals we
need to worry about our own
resilience uh
friends loved one significant other we
need to give resilience to others I
think we need resilience against what
against misinformation no or corrosive
information about about resilience is
about everything so I'll give you my my
favorite story on
resilience there's a principle called
secure
attachment and uh the story The Standard
story and secure attachment is the
following imagine your parent you have a
four-year-old kid you go with them to
the park and you say kid go and play and
the kid goes and play on the swing and
comes back 30 minutes later if happen
you have a kid with secure attachment on
the other hand if you say go and play
and and every 90 second they look to see
if you're still waiting for them not so
successful now for me if I think about
that that means that you walk around the
world with kind of a feeling that you
have an insurance policy for everything
you know usually if you think about life
and you say sometimes bad things happen
and resilience is how much we jump back
do we bounce back to where we were do we
bounce back to to a better place a worse
place how fast that's usually resilience
secure attachment is without anything
bad happens it's about what is your
attitude to life how much do you feel
that if something bad will happen
somebody will will catch you and if you
feel that if something bad will happen
somebody will catch you you you become
your force in the world is becoming very
different you can take risks you can try
different things right you could if you
think that nobody will be there to catch
you what's the chance you will start a
new company take a risk and and so on
very very low so this sense of
resilience secure attachment is
incredibly important in the
society now if each of us took a stock
and said if we fail on hard
time if we were hospitalized if we lost
a loved one if we got bankrupt you know
name name a few of those things who can
we trust if you have a long list or at
least a list with with a few names on it
you you have some sense in the world
that the world that you can you can dare
and if you say no there's nobody I will
be alone uh if that happens now now
you're in a very very different world so
can we give that how do we give that
sense to ourselves and to
others and on the individual level
right think about your friends and say
to yourself
what what can you do to give your
friends and family a higher feeling of
secure
attachment how would you create it for
yourself you know I I think we don't
think enough about that but but I think
that's a that's on the individual level
so secure attachment resilience to
ourselves to
others stop
ostracizing H be more cognitive of how
we consume information and how we share
it multiple opinions intellectual
humility there's lots of things we could
do on the individual level I think
that's that's kind of um the starting
point but but we can't stop there I
don't think it will be enough I think
the the the big forces of corrosive
information are out there and and
they're getting worse so if you think
about this notion of shibolet and
identity it's getting worse right we we
are now in a situation where politicians
for example can say things that are
clearly false clearly false they're and
they're saying it just as a mark of
identity and we let it
go uh that's that problem will not solve
itself but but we as a
society have to figure out mechanisms
against that because if a politician is
saying something and they're saying it
for identity but you think it's fact
we're now in
trouble so how do we inoculate ourselves
against
that so that one I don't know I mean you
you started our discussion with
complaining that that um I don't give
enough solution so you know I think the
the individual Solutions are are
important oh before I do
that you know AI is certainly going to
make this problem more complex a
thousand times harder yes and
know usually by the way for people
following your Twitter feed your X feed
uh you posted two videos yes that are
clearly deep fakes yeah um did you post
them knowing that they were deep fakes
or were okay yeah just making sure yeah
a friend made them for me
yeah so I I I dedicated the book to to
Trump I I I I kind wrote a dedication of
the book to to Trump and to Elon Musk
thanking them for inspir different types
of inspiration and so on I also thanked
other people but I didn't post those
videos and a friend made a a deep fake
video of trump and a fake video of Elon
Musk thanking me and taking taking this
this thing further but yes I knew
um so so so you know usually when we
think about systems like think about
driving with with cars and especially
with uh you
know autonomous vehicles we think that
the human link is going to be the weak
one that machines are better and humans
are going to be the the weak link right
every
time people fly we have more accident if
machine flies H when people type we have
more spelling mistakes than if machine I
mean in many many ways we think humans
make more
mistake once you introduce
AI with the power to
deceive uh and to create corrosive
information uh human beings are going to
be the strong point you know just
because just because technology is going
to be so terrible so terrible that we
have to work on yeah but humans are
going to use those tools some people
would use it but I'm saying is as as as
end
users um we need to get much better at
this right so if you say oh as an end
user with cars Humanity will be better
off if you stop driving M as an end user
of
information Humanity will be you need to
stop trusting and and start relying on
yourself like that's the that's the
difference right that if in every in
many other aspects like take Physicians
we want Physicians to rely more on
algorithms and more on automated surgery
and all kinds of tools like that in the
world of consuming information because
what I think AI will do to that you want
people to rely more on themselves and
less on the technology
we want people to trust less be more
critical have more intellectual humility
all of those things we need to improve
ourselves right it's not there like with
driving you don't say oh let's solve the
driving Problem by getting people to
drive better saying no let's replace it
with technology here technology is going
to be very different so I think we we do
need to improve our own skills but then
there will be need some some things that
social networks will have to change and
regulations will have to change and you
know the way that regulations work is
that we we find out bad things that we
do and then we fix it later sometimes it
takes a really long
time here it's also important to figure
out what are the things that we're doing
badly and now let's start let's start
regulating that so you know uh we don't
have rules against
lying uh you can't lie on in in court
right there's there's rules against that
if you're a farmer company
you can't lie in your ads uh and B that
but but other than that oh and you can't
lie in a way that would get somebody
else to lose
money but if you think about what's
happening for example in the
US this corrosive information is costing
all of us a
lot right it's not an
individual that that is losing but but
mistrust in our
institution is costing all of us a lot
uh very hard to think about how to
quantify it but if we if we started to
quantify it we would say oh my goodness
when people start trusting the
government and starting the healthcare
system and starting this is this is
incredibly expensive for us so now we're
starting to realize that corrosive
information is costly and dangerous and
has lots of implications and we need to
figure out how how we're going to
regulate it we can't we can't just let
it go continuously like like you know
we let's take food and we found out that
you know heroin is not that good and we
said okay here are some restrictions on
how to use it meth not so good here's
some restrictions against that uh I
think with information we're getting
there we're getting to things that are
incredibly devastating for people what
do you think about Free
Speech okay so I think about everything
in a cost benefit way H there's not a
single principle that I would say that
I'm 100% sure that it's it's the right
one I think free speech is a wonderful
principle all else being equal I prefer
free speech to No Free
Speech uh but
um when if I'm convinced that the costs
outweigh the benefits but I need to be
convinced that H I'm willing to restrict
everything not just not just free speech
um you know Society is moving in such
ways uh that that it is not clear to me
um that a good a good world is
consistent with with all of those
principles for example free speech is
wonderful um but trust is also wonderful
and people not hating each other is also
wonderful and now when you understand
that Free Speech the way it's being
utilized takes
has a cost on these other things we are
in a cost benefit way and you can say I
don't care about everything else free
speech is about is about above all and
um that's that's not an empirical
perspective it's an ideological
perspective on an empirical side I would
say if you can convince me with with
data that the cost of free speech
outweigh uh the benefits then I'm
willing to consider what kind of
limitation I'm willing to
have yeah the only way that we'd be able
to do that is first people have to agree
on what we're trying to accomplish this
is why going back to the example you
used of Education this is where that all
breaks down what what is our aim what
are we trying to do because this is
measurable and we're either hitting it
or we're not hitting it if we're not
hitting it then we have to do something
new and if the structures that we have
don't allow us to hit that then the
structures have to change but so some
things some things you're absolutely
right but there are some things are low
hanging fruit so for example uh again we
know very little about education but one
of the things we know is that the
differences between good schools and not
so good schools are less about what the
kids learn during the year and what more
about what they forget in the
summer right kids who have an amazing
environment and summer camps and and
homes that they teach them don't forget
much in the summer maybe they even learn
and kids that come from impoverished
neighborhoods forget a lot in the summer
once you understand this you say let's
move to the to something like the kip
schools where they're all year round
let's not have a three three months
summer vacation let's make the the
vacation but is that your intuition
about the kip schools is that it's just
the fact that they're year round to me
it's the militant identity driven we
don't do that here there are very strict
rules you would hear you don't it gives
them something to Aspire to it gives
them bright lines to adhere to like I've
try do you know Jeffrey Canada no God
I've got to find this guy like I am
desperate to get that man on this show
we have tried and tried and tried anyway
the whole idea amazing it's an amazing
organization unbelievable and they
certainly have more than just just that
but I gave you that as an example
because that's a factor that we know
works we know that the summer forgetting
is a big is a big deal discipline and so
on have a lot of intuitions around it
and reasons and I can I can play the
logic of why it happens and for what
kids it will be happening and so on not
my field but I've not seen the the
evidence for that yet it might be that
it exists but I I don't see it but but
but you're right that there are some
things that are um High hanging fruit
that we'll need to decide you know what
is the goal of education and you and I
will probably agree that we want kids to
keep on having the thirst for knowledge
and we want people to be flexible and
and you know we could we could Define if
few think that we'll probably agree but
there's also some Basics uh that we
would also agree and not
forgetting would certainly would
certainly be one of them but but I gave
the the education one as an example
because it's so easy to it's so
difficult to experiment with but I think
that and I gave it on purpose right
because say here's a here's a
domain that we find it morally
objectionable to
experiment but in some level we have
have to cuz how are we going to make any
progress doesn't feel true to me so I
have a different take on that I this is
not an area I'm super familiar with I'm
shooting from the hip I am outside of my
realm of expertise I want to fully
acknowledge that but at the same time I
believe people have an obligation to
themselves and the world uh to
articulate how they would approach a
novel problem okay so knowing that I'm
approaching this as a novel problem I
look at that and I say okay let each
School run its own experiment Let It Be
an experiment the kip school started as
an experiment many of them were started
in the same building that the the Normal
public school is in they take people on
a completely randomized lottery so it's
not even like it selects for you know
better kids or whatever and
so right there you have two different
schools and if you could that are both
experiments and you could let the
parents decide hey what kids do you want
to or what school do you want to send
your kids to Boom now we see which
experiment Works which one doesn't I
understand there are going to be a lot
of complexities in terms of federal
dollars and things like that just to
just to be clear the moment you let the
parent parents choose the experiment is
not as good why because now you have
self- selection okay so imagine that you
have school a and school B and you let
the parents choose the parents follow
their intuition of whether my kid will
be better in school a and school B but
now the the schools get very different
kids so it's much easier you can't
compare anymore that's what's called
self- selection right that the in an
experiment one of the things you want is
that
randomize you
randomized assign people to conditions
yeah but don't you think that if you do
that like with Kip that same uh pool of
students in the same building but
different teachers different mentality
you get these wildly different outcomes
that we can look at that and go o I'd
rather have my kid in the kip School
than the normal school I'm saying if the
experiment gives the parent a choice
then it's already not a good
experiment um but I'll give you another
example for this so when I was in the in
the burn Department there was a
treatment called the jobs pressure
bandages and it was like um because I
have Burns all over I had a it was like
a superman but ugly Brown so no
Spider-Man Spider-Man so I had um a
shirt very tight and it was supposed to
hold the hold the and and create
pressure so I had legs I had um a shirt
long sleeve shirt I had two gloves and I
had one on my head so really the only
things you could see were my eyes ears
mouth and brown brown Spider-Man kind of
walking around I walked with a hat it
felt a little bit less strange but but
that's what it
was and and I asked the doctors is there
good evidence that this is working
and they gave me a paper but the paper
did not have a control group they didn't
compare half the people yes half the
people no and and I said look I I don't
know if this is really working how how
how do you know that that it's working
um and one of the things I proposed to
them I said look the upper thighs I
don't have
scars why don't you take an iron and
give me a equivalent scar on the left
and equivalent scar on the right put me
to sleep I don't want to to bew when you
give me this burn but give me equivalent
Burns temperature and duration and let's
put the jobs on one leg and not on the
other leg and let's see if if it it's
all working and I said you know I I
think that there's going to be
generations of burn patients that are
going to get this terrible treatment
it's very tough right it's
it's hard to move uh you're not free
it's very very hot it's itching it's
sometimes when I would put it on it
would tear the Del delate skin and not
without
cost the treatment and I said look I'm
willing to be a guinea pig Jesus for
this give me and by the way I think
every burned patient will be willing to
do it because we we have a kind of a
tremendous camaraderie with all the next
generation of burn patients like and and
they couldn't do it they said on ethical
reasons and and I can see why ethically
it's complex but you can see why
ethically it's also complex not to do it
now Generations of burn patients are
getting a treatment that I don't know if
it's
effective because because we're not
willing ethically to do the experiment
so I love experiments and and there are
many experiments and that's what I was
going with the
education there are many experiments
that we're not willing to do
ethically but at the same time uh not
doing an experiment also has an ethical
cost and the ethical cost is we're not
learning how to do it better and we're
subjecting future generation of to to to
worse off treatments so that that's for
me is the issue I I love experiments I
think it's the only way truly to learn
something because of our because of our
biases um and and if we don't have that
that compar to the control condition we
never know if this is actually better or
worse MH how do we get a culture of
doing experiments even when they're
difficult and complex and painful and
even if we H don't believe if we even if
we're sure that the the experiment would
yield a certain result and so on that
that for me is a big is a big issue for
us so I feel like the problem might be
something else more tied to misbelief
than anything because countries are
already running their own experiments we
can look at a lot of different countries
see how they handle education the
problem is that we have very different
northstars so China's Northstar we are
going to run this [__] like they're
here to run the table just in no
uncertain terms and so the way that they
run their education is in alignment with
that if what I hear about the Tik Tok
algorithm is really true and that in
China they're like showing you kids that
win the science fair and in America it's
the best dancers and people doing dumb
[__] really is that what you hear that's
what I hear I haven't looked at it so I
don't know if that's actually true but
um it's certainly from a psychological
warfare perspective it would be very
wise for them to do that uh but anyway
there's a lot to look at I think that we
we're not looking at it because we are
so entrenched in these different camps
and so bringing this back to the thing I
want to get out of all this is I want
people to understand everything that you
lay out in the book resonated with me
very very much people go down these
funnels of misbelief they develop a core
identity around something the only thing
that I think you and I may disagree on
is I think everybody has misbeliefs I
don't think it's like oh one subset of
people I get it there are people that
are more prone to maybe certain styles
of misbelief but none n of us see the
world as it actually is I don't think we
disagree on that
um you know again the the first figure
in the book is showing that conspiracies
are not about being left or right
everybody thinks that the other side is
conspiratorial they they are held by all
all side of the political
spectrum and and there are things that
um we we all hold and and there's a
couple of exercises uh that basically
get people to recognize
I hope some of our some of our
misbeliefs
so
um you know I talked on some on some
radio about about misbeliefs and
somebody uh wrote and complained that I
I gave examples of people on the right I
do not give examples enough examples on
people on the left and conspiracies and
and of course um he was right and it's
because you know cancel culture is so
powerful you know the left has its own
its own issues um but but giving
examples of specific things that that um
the left is doing in a in a crazy way
and the the identity around it is so
powerful that it's even hard to to say
to say the words because because people
will come after you that's right that's
right which you've had a lot of in the
last few years that's right you talked
about earlier the interview um I didn't
want to distract from the points you
were making but that is it's very it's a
really potent example of what happens
when people grab onto an idea and they
need the villain and they need somebody
to be
wrong but it's also an example of okay
like what what is the truth are you
going to be able to convince people I
know people were comparing you to Geral
which for anybody that knows the um Nazi
propagandist that seems a little uh
outrageous there's a way there's a way
to look at it as a compliment I was the
chief Consciousness architect for the
coid pandemic like you could say oh my
goodness that's a compliment it's
certainly high level but no not really
no
the you know the
psychology of being attacked is very
tough I I would say that in the first
month when I would try to have
conversations but
also for the next next two years like
every day that I would get a death
threat I'm sure I had I lost a few IQ
points for that day because you were so
preoccupied yeah I would say that in the
beginning it felt like I lost
20% like I I I would try to focus I
would try to focus and I would feel like
there's something really missing that I
was not as quick and I was
not but I I was slower um and so on and
and then part of it was social media
related some of it was like oh you know
the my my computer Bings with something
or uh what what is this I I open my
email which which ones are are going to
be um hurting and so
on um there was a point where people
attacked me in the street that's crazy
that was that was very very tough um
really did you ever have a car accident
yes so so I I had a motorcycle accident
once and and everything felt like in
slow motion they had the same yeah and
and being attacked like this was the
same I I don't think it lasted very long
somebody called me a kept on calling me
a murder and a psychopath and and
somebody else joined um it felt it felt
like in slow
motion for a very long time it was such
a such
a a bizarre a bizarre EXP experience but
I felt I felt very much this drain of
intelligence and and and stress and so
on and you know we talked about how
people um are looking for a villain and
looking for a story in some sense this
book it it it struck me only when I
finished it in some sense this book is
is my the way I dealt with the
stress I was attacked I was stressed how
did I solve it I found the story and I
found the villain and and the story is
the book and the villain is is
eventually the combination of human
nature and society and and so on it's
not a simple story it's a complex story
as well but um
but but it is so negative like if I if
you ask me
about how people feel in in counil
culture and what what are the lengths
that people are willing to
go uh
to reshape their understanding and
rechange their what they're willing to
say and and so on it's it's tremendous
because it's such such a feeling it's
such a a devastating feeling even I I
feel of it like the last time I got a
death threat was four days ago but but
the the the rate is going down it's not
every day
anymore um but but it was a very very
long very very tough period and
I you know now we're in Hollywood like
this is Hollywood right it's is Ish is
um since I came here I Heard lots of
stories about people who've been
recently been been cancelled I I can
imagine now uh that that feeling and I
think I can imagine the the length that
people would go not to not to exp not in
a healthy way not in not in a good way
for
society yeah group think yeah so that
was um going back to the initial premise
the thing that I want to help people do
is be able to think independently to not
get caught up in group think to be able
to
outperform the vast majority of the
world my hypothesis goes like this uh
you need massive amounts of humility you
need to completely distrust yourself
because again this is me people need a
norstar I highly advise fulfillment and
to actually get where you want to go you
have to be able to get as close to
ground truth as possible so that you
know okay well if I try I'm going to get
this outcome you're going to be off
you're going to refine refine refine but
you have to stare nakedly at your own
inadequacies in that moment where you're
assessing did what I just try worked or
not because you're going to be able to
come up with a compelling narrative as
to why either it wasn't your fault which
is what most people do I'm a victim I'm
whatever there's all these reasons
outside of my control why this didn't
work it doesn't have anything to do with
me I'm a good person I can still feel
good uh you'll stay stalled out forever
you'll never figure out exactly why what
happened happened and so you have to
stop and and say okay I'm going to point
all 10 fingers of responsibility back at
myself what can I do differently in
order to get a different outcome now
once you click over into that
zone I should say two click over into
that zone you can't build your
self-esteem around being right and this
is where the I need to feel good about
myself derails people down the funnel of
misbelief if in said you even mention
this in the book this is a central
thesis of my life if you have a growth
mindset you are not prone to going down
the funnel of misbelief because your
identity is not tied up in a belief or
something you've said your identity is
tied up in identifying what works and
getting better so that you can execute
against that so anytime that you notice
you're falling short you can improve so
intellectual humility and
experimentation go hand in hand right
because the moment you say I'm not
really sure then you go and test
multiple things
I I have my own version of what what you
said um so my version of this is
believing in
karma and
there are many definitions but for me
karma is the law of cause and effect and
it means that when we do good things the
odds of other good things happen is is
higher and when we do bad things for
mystical reasons or because humans are a
social creature h i yeah not mystical
yeah just just because the the way the
the world works right you do a favor to
somebody you know you do you do positive
things you increase the probability that
something good would happen but no not
mystical but you do something negative
you increase the chances that something
bad will happen down line but it's
probalistic I don't know if the
percentage but you know there's a small
percentage
Improvement but for me this notion of
karma is connect is connected with the
idea that we don't judge ourself based
on the outcome but we judge yourself on
what we do because you say I've done a
good thing I ended my job here H and now
it's the world's turn and it's statistic
it's going to be probabalistic it could
turn out to be good it could out to be
bad but but my responsibility ends where
I finish doing my job at the best
ability possible but but for me that
changes my framework from judging myself
based on outcomes to judging myself on
whether I think I fulfilled my duty
that's really interesting you and I view
the world very
differently so that's clear I have heard
you uh I will steal man your argument
that the world there is a right right
way to live there are right things to do
that we have duties and obligations to
each other as a species and the the
world is far too complex so all you can
do is say did I adhere to my duty yes or
no and if I did then hey amazing and if
it ends up backfiring and being a
problem I too complicated there's
nothing I can do beyond that that's
beyond myself have I understood your
position accurately no you because you
you've taken away you've you've taken
one part of it and I don't think that I
always know the right thing to do so so
you you're you're connecting Karma and
certainty for me they're not connected
they're are separate issues so I would
say based on what I know right now I'm
doing the best I can and it includes
could include learning and improving and
all kinds of other things but but the
notion is that my obligation is to act
in my best ability right now but my
responsibil I don't judge myself based
on whether it worked out I judge myself
did I adhere to my current standards so
so the the I don't want it to be seen
that I think that as absolute
standards of behavior everybody has
their own but what's that built around
is it for you personally is everybody
building a moral code is it a religious
code it is it is it is about the
particular project so so I'll give you
an example I during coid I I designed a
program that I thought could reduce
domestic
violence uh against kids there was a
huge
increase and I had this idea of what
would work I talk to lots of experts and
I designed something I worked very hard
on it and um it turned out that for
legal
reasons we couldn't introduce it to
schools M uh should I feel bad about
this or or not like I felt terrible I
felt terrible because I I felt that this
was going to be good and I was
disappointed it didn't work but I also
said you know I took a real problem that
pains me and and I and I did my best to
try and push something something forward
it was it was what I thought was the
best
solution that I could help
and I I I I Tred to basically say I did
I did what I thought was right I'm
really disappointed it didn't work out
but I'm not going to judge myself and
saying next time I'm only going to do
things if I know that they'll work out
no I said I I want like when I see
problems and I have solutions that are
low probability events but might work in
this I still want to reinforce that
behavior
so imagine the human being is a learning
algorithm and you're saying what
behaviors do you want to
reinforce and I think that low low
probability high stake success is great
to reinforce but it means that to
reinforce that people need to
reinforce what they do and not the
outcome like let's just take um you have
this you have a a set of Amazing Ideas
that each of them has 5% chance of
working
out if you base it on reward most time
you would say you failed you failed you
failed right 19 out of 20 times you
would say you failed if you basically
move to a situation you did your best in
each of those you would reinforce more
of
those so that's where that's what I mean
by karma is that I want to reinforce by
the way it's not just in me but but in
everybody like with experiments at the
University right the people who work
with me I don't want them to judge thems
on whether the experiment worked or not
work because then there's a really easy
shortcut do trivial
experiments I I want people to do risky
experiments that we don't know if they
will work or not work we'll learn the
most out of them so the the thing that
tripped you up in my Steel Man and your
argument is certainty it's it's the
outcome it's the it's the it's the the
well I said that so all I'm trying to do
is is um Faithfully articulate what
you're saying yeah what I hear you
saying oh oh I see when when you say
about what me yeah yeah so when
the your your complaint about my my
statement my complaint I don't have a
complaint no not complaint but but the
the the challenge that you said that we
well first I just want to see if I
understand we defer is is about the fact
that I think that for me the doing the
right thing is not a universal principle
and it can change over time and I'm
committed to learning and improving and
so on but given what I know right
now I want to feel fulfilled I want
people around me to be fulfilled when
they have done their best and and not
depend on an
outcome yeah so um I agree but I want to
make sure that I articulate your point
in a way that you say yes I understand
what I hear you saying is that you
cannot guarantee the outcome because you
can't guarantee the outcome it doesn't
make sense to judge somebody their
Endeavors based on the outcome far
better to say did you do that thing
sincerely did did you really give it a
shot and if you really gave it a shot
regardless of whether it ends up being
successful is irrelevant because the
behavior that you want to reinforce is a
sincere attempt to do something um you
said risky seems like a reasonable word
but risky in a way that like it really
has a chance of adding value to some
group or Humanity at large right y okay
uh that's I actually get that and in my
own life I say I don't value myself for
whether I succeed or fail I value myself
for the sincere pursuit of something
yeah but my whole life is predicated on
Jud um steering by not my intentions but
by My outcome and so the subtle
difference because I think you and I are
basically saying the same thing but the
thing that drives me like a maniac is
this slight tweak on it which is I
really believe that I can bend the world
to my will but I have to exist in the
physics of progress and so I have to go
o I thought I was going to get X result
and I didn't get X result that means I
need to do something different in order
to get X result and if I attempt this
enough times and I refine refine refine
that I'll ultimately be able to get
there yeah and I think we agree because
because you're saying once you're into
something that's
the the the journey but once the journey
is over there's an evaluation and the
evaluation should create a sense for
improvement right like and I I don't
think that if you if something doesn't
work you should learn nothing from it
you should certainly learn from it and
try to improve for the next for the next
time but I think both of those are
important it's
the not being sure testing multiple
things H and rewarding effort rather
than than outcome in the short term
because we think that rewarding effort
but in the long term would be the right
the right
approach so along those lines is
somebody that's seen misbelief so up
close what's the move like what do you
do from here keeping in mind what I'm
trying to answer for the people that are
watching right now is precisely how they
should be approaching this problem so so
individually I think invest in your own
resilience secure you can deal with it
yeah so you can deal with stress because
if you understand the RO of stress than
you and that resilience is built strong
family life people that you love and
care about family friends yes stop
bickering with your significant other
but but you know we do we do so many
things that reduce resilience we not
intentionally but but you know we do we
do lots of those things so it's in like
having high level of trust and
resilience with your your close
environment unbelievably important for
you and and for
others and that's that's number one uh
when you identify people early on in the
funnel of misbelief help them I I use
the The Heading hug misbeliever but you
know like you know these people are
really suffering and and they're going
to suffer more and their suffering is
going to have consequences for them for
you for society try to do early
detection in your if I can predict why
you say they're suffering they're
suffering because the funnel of
misbelief starts with somebody who's
incredibly stressed somebody who's
probably feeling a exercized somebody
that's being pushed into the arms of
people that agree with what they agree
with they and they need that because
they're not getting it anywhere else um
they probably also have personality
traits that lead them
to um believe would you call them
falsehoods anyway so negative things
lead all of us down this path and so
when you see somebody heading down that
path it's probably indicative of
something bad has happened yeah just
just imagine somebody who believes in
God they basically wake up and they say
oh the world is good yes that there
devil sometimes but it's mostly good and
there's an entity that takes care of me
in principle and and so on now take a
misbeliever say it's the lens from which
they view everything or the glasses in
which they view everything and they
mistrust and so on think about how
difficult it is to wake up like this you
wake up and you feel that there's a
network of pedophiles that is trying to
take your kids and they're they're
trying to implant a G5 chip in them and
they're trying to make sure that they
don't move they don't see nature you
know just just think about what all the
terrible things that that that people
live then I think a lot of our
discussion so that's that's you know the
this the emotional element and a little
bit of not ostracizing people on on that
side but a lot of what we talked about
is is the cognitive part right how do we
keep multiple hypothesis how do we keep
the idea that we might be wrong how do
we inject it on ourselves so we gave two
two little party tricks one is what
would it take to change your mind and
the other one is the illusion of
explanatory depth but those are
attacking the the cognitive component
where you say to yourself I don't want
to
be I don't want to be 100%
sure in anything that is going to color
my worldview or at least I'm going to be
very very cautious before I before I get
there and and that's that's the
individual level and I think that's the
the level that we we're talking here but
I'm also hoping that we will do that we
will do other things that will you know
will create different social networks
that will think about different
standards uh for politicians that for
opinions not just politicians for for
anybody who is speaking I think I think
those are important progress but not not
something that we you and I could do
individually own on what change you want
to
see so um so so let's let's take the
example of of social
media um I don't want people to be
deprived of misbelief in conspiracy
theories you mean be deprived like uh
one approach is to is to uh censor so
you know social network X is not
allowing um flat earther to to share
anything there now really is a social
network X yes that's the you mean random
that's right random yeah yeah sorry I
didn't mean that um I don't think that's
healthy I think we need to learn to deal
with different opinions and I think we
need to learn to deal with uh conspiracy
theories and but it's a question of
what's the what's the Right Mix what
what mix do we want to expose ourselves
to or what kind of mix do I want my kids
to expose themselves to I don't want
them to I don't want it for me to be
zero I think they need to I'm hoping to
to be there with them when they consume
some of those things and develop the
ability to not just believe but suspend
belief and question and test things more
more generally but I think that's that's
an example of you know what is the how
do we
regulate the
mix you know we we think about pieces of
information I think that's not the right
level of analysis I think the right
level of fin is a person and what are
they exposed to as a person because I'm
fine for anybody to be exposed
to to videos let's just say not you know
not things that I don't know what
there's some things that probably not
but I'm willing for everybody to be
exposed to videos of name the conspiracy
theory I don't want people to start
being exposed 100% to that so we need to
think about that another simple EX
another simple thing is
that the the the action of liking or
promoting or whatever it is is very
ambiguous when I uh like something what
am I really saying do I say it's true do
I say it's ridiculous do I say it's
funny you know in a in a regular
conversation you would know what I mean
and if I say something hey look at this
this is ridiculous can you believe
somebody else believes that that will be
very different in saying I think this is
true but but the way social networks are
created we we are it's everything is
ambiguous and you can understand why why
they do it but that's not how we're
consuming it and the people who are
sharing it don't get to convey their
meaning to the PE people who are
consuming it right you said social proof
people say lots of likes so must be true
no it might be that it's ridiculous it
doesn't it doesn't mean that so so I
think I think we have a lot of solutions
that we need to figure out there I don't
know if they will do it themselves do we
need to create some standards I don't
know what it is but if you think about
language just what like is and you say
when these these social networks are not
allowing likes to express the the range
of what people mean we have a terrible
communication
gap and then we have two things about
what we do with the first
amendment I think it's a you know we
started talking about because you want
to curtail
it so you know we'll go back to the
experiments remember I I I would love to
go on a journey that explores the
downside of free speech and if at the
end of this journey I would be convinced
empirically that the
downside outweighs the positives then I
would start exploring
better ways to do
it you know there are some things we
don't allow already right I I don't
think necessarily we're doing the right
thing so you know there's there's things
against violence and sex for young kids
we've decided that those two categories
are are important and we're not
questioning that right but I I'm not
sure that some of the things we making
it uh free for our kids are not worse
than those two like how how did we
decides like what was the mechanism that
got us to decide that sing a nipple is
what is it like rated R I don't know
what but whatever that you you can't see
a nipple or a you know maybe you can see
a gun but you can't see a you know a
punch you see a gun or a nipple but not
a gun and a nipple yeah I get all that
so so we have curtailed we have decided
as a society that we're willing that
these are these are things that are
taboo that we're not allowing kids in
certain ages and their rules I don't
think those things have ever been tested
somebody decided I don't like that I
want I want things to be tested and and
I am I think that some of the things
we're exposing ourselves are worse than
those right is
is is a conspiracy the is is exposing
people uh to a
cabal uh that is smuggling kids uh for
sexual
gratification um you know like where
does it stand on the scale how do we how
do we think about it what about what
about the conspiracy that the the FDA is
controlled
by you know a person person y I guess we
can't use x anymore probably probably
soon for anything um so I I like an
empirical
approach and and by the way this is my
guess is that the the sex and the
violence have were done with with
zero uh with zero evidence with just
intuition about what would would be
negative for kids what do you think
about Jordan Peterson's idea that speech
is effectively thinking and if you're
curtailing people's speech you're
curtailing what they think and their
ability to think and thusly you are
making making it impossible for people
to think through difficult problems well
yeah I it's it's not that I think that I
don't take Free Speech
lightly um I just watched this amazing
documentary on Floyd Abrams on on you
know the the the important um free First
Amendment lawyer that that's I mean just
really it's an incredibly
important thing but again I take nothing
as uh saying that that I'm not willing
to trade it off you know there are
people that are single issue
voters this is it it's all
about guns abortions uh gay rights I I
think that everything is a trade-off and
I think that for most things we don't
understand them sufficiently deeply and
we're just in the beginning of the
journey and we need to understand it and
we need to keep on willing to change it
later on so for example if I let's say
let's say we found out that there's a
particular speech that we we all agree
empirically is more hurtful than sex and
nudity and we said this particular
speech speech L is
prohibited
um I'm I don't want to say this is it
we'll keep on developing new speeches
right we this needs to be an ongoing
project on figuring out what's damaging
and what tradeoffs we're willing to make
like the the world we're in now 10 years
ago if I asked you 10 years ago what are
the challenges that are facing human
nature human Human Society what is what
are the big challenges misbelief would
not have been one of them now it's
certainly one of them Society is
changing technology is changing we need
to change our rules and regulations
accordingly 20 years ago we wouldn't
think that we need to do a law of guns
texting and
driving now now certain L texting and
driving is killing way too many
people so so this is a a living system
social science unlike physics physics is
not changed for a very long time social
science changes all the time because the
things that tap
our
irrationality keep on changing and the
type of mistakes we make keep on
changing so we we need to change with
it interesting Okay so for me as I think
about trying to put together a mental
framework that's going to protect myself
I don't see how we build a mental
framework without having a North star uh
a thing that we're aiming at
so rather than asking you to give
something that everybody can use what's
the mental framework that you use I I
don't think it's very different than
yours so you have a your your North Star
is very general and it's subjected to
change because the language that you use
is is General right you're not saying I
know the one way to get fulfilled and to
to improve myself in humanity you kept
it at a very high level on purpose and
you say and I'm not sure exactly what
the path in fact I probably don't know
the path and I'll keep on learning about
it so I like your framework very much I
think that as as people uh we have this
beautiful thing it call social utility
we care about others it's it's it's a
it's a beautiful thing we have this
capacity to care about others um and and
I think we need to build it up not not
crush it and tell people that they need
to be selfish I think we need to build
it up I think it's good for people I
think it's good for society I think we
we tap into some of the good things
about irrationality right in the in the
standard rational framework people are
selfish
there's some good things about
irrationality we we love we like poetry
we create art we care about others there
so I think
that creating a goal of fulfilling
ourselves by improving other other
people's lives I think is a wonderful is
a wonderful abstract goal as long as you
don't say I know what is the exact way
to do it and then the rest of the things
you you said it's a journey right we
don't know and we are committed to
exploring it we're committed to
investing effort uh to test things that
we think work but don't work and and the
other way around and to continue and to
continue working and I think those two
elements are
great so I I would I I would stick I
would stick with
yours I would I would add the component
of of karma I would say that because
it's a long-term
Journey uh I want people to try things
that are have a low probability High
payoff and if you think about the risk
return world you say I really want
people to try uh low probability High
returns so I want I want to reward
effort not uh not outcomes
um and that's great oh and and then if
we if we add one more thing I would say
plus if you think about the
energy that is required to to do all of
that I think that energy needs a good
base in
resilience so if you think about the
world in which say how do you get people
to wake up in the morning and and be
willing to take steps and take risks and
try something and doubt themselves and
so on you want them to be not in stress
and you want them to feel to high high
resilience because you the the human
motivation aspect the way you've defined
your objective doesn't have the place
where you derive energy to do it from
and I think the the doesn't have not
enough like you say it's about the goal
it's about but but what gets you in a
day-to-day basis to be willing to to
take these extra steps and I
think resilience is is one of the things
that supports this now think think to
yourself you you told me a little bit
about your your start
and what it means to live in a world
where you have partners that you can you
can trust and to be in an environment
where I mean those are those are
incredibly important
elements yeah agreed very much I'm not
sure that I understand what you mean so
part of my formula is that it's got to
be something that you care about and
serves yourself as well as other people
um and then anyway I've got whole thing
about how you build desire and all that
but I I do very much agree with But but
so what what do I mean by resilience so
so you can have all of these good
intentions but let's say you wake up one
day and you feel this scarcity
mindset what are the odds that you could
take long-term actions that you could
invest the the mindset that you have to
have to fulfill yourself is a mindset
where you can say I can take risks and I
don't need to worry about being
cancelled and I don't need to worry
about expressing my opinion
psychological safety is so important in
the
workplace why because if we tell people
don't express your ideas what are we
hoping that to get out of them so so
this this support
network uh is incredibly important to
allow you to have the energy that you
that you want to uh to fulfill yourself
now my guess is that you have built your
life in a way that you have a lot of
this
so much that you don't notice
it now that that's an area that I'm
hyper aware of um I just use a different
phrase which is the people with the um
strongest relationships or strongest
home life take the biggest risks so um
very very very much agree with that uh
so the only thing I think that there
might be a slight difference in is that
idea of Duty um that there's a right way
to do something and as long as I did
that um for me I just have an extra
thing that matters to me whether this is
what everybody needs to adopt or not I
don't know I I don't think of it like
that but uh for someone to live a
fulfilling life I feel like they need to
have a sense of control and agency in
their life and to have that you have to
exist in the physics of progress to do
that when something doesn't go right you
have to say Okay then there's something
wrong with my base assumptions there's
something wrong with the Distortion in
the lenses through which I view the
world I'm not at Ground truth because
I'm not at Ground truth I have missed
something and so I just need to look and
figure out what that thing is but um
yeah I think ultimately we're very very
close in terms of I will say one other
thing that when you said passion so I um
one of the things I'm finding myself
these days that I am able to find
passion in many different
projects so um I was three weeks ago I
was in Brazil and I went to visit some
of the faas you know the the places
where people live illegally very very
tough places no sewage poverty violence
drugs you name
it and I came to visit an organization
that is trying to get these favas out of
poverty kind of an amazing organization
and and their question was what is the
best
investment to get people out of poverty
what's the what's the marginal
contribution of investing in domestic
violence in reducing domestic violence
reducing violence that is not domestic
in helping people find jobs in getting
kids to go to school and getting sewage
you know just the number of problems is
is incredible more food more health I
mean just the number of problems is
amazing where where is the marginal
where is the marginal thing now that
problem was not high on my list before
but going and visiting for a few days um
certainly got me to
start um it became very high on my on my
on my list just thinking about it
there's about 200 million people in
Brazil about 20 of them are in this 20
million are in this um in these
conditions and um I I think that my my
motivation I if you show me three
projects and you tell me you ask me
where I think would be have the biggest
impact um I think I would pick just the
one that I have the I think I can have
the biggest impact so I and and maybe
this is different than than you you but
it's not that I I say oh poverty is is
my thing or health is my thing or end of
life and so on I just look at the world
and I say where can I make an
impact it's it's kind of my my starting
point and I I think I could get excited
with anything as long as I felt that I
could make an impact and it's within my
reach so the the the fact that my
knowledge is relevant and I have agency
and I could help I think I could be
excited with very different
topics and you seem to have um specific
topics that excite
you yeah I think that um if I had to
guess going back to your favella problem
one it fits into a type of problem that
you find interesting like what this
social rats nest how do we begin to
untangle that that's sort of the theme
of all your books um also I mean look
part of it is you went there you saw the
people this is what what I call when
when I talk about building desire people
have to find people that that are real
that they can picture that they ideally
know and love and they want to do
something to help them or at least
people like them um so yes I think all
of us ultimately have what I call the
world of there's a world of things that
we like to be around uh and so the more
like if you're huge into soccer like but
you're an accountant well go figure out
how an accountant can help a soccer club
so there are things like that but yeah I
I could I mean and have when I was in
nutrition I was in nutrition I wasn't
like thinking oh I'm going to get out of
this I was like Hey I'm going to find a
way to connect to this and and really
build something here again just this
everything comes back to me that there
is a physics to the human mind and once
you understand the physics of the human
mind we actually talked about this
briefly we didn't go deep into it but
you can reattribute your emotions so
you're walking across the bridge you
have a heightened
arousal uh you meet an attractive woman
at least
subconsciously they were reattribution
the emotion from the bridge yeah to the
woman now you can actually take a hold
of that process and say okay every time
I explain to people why I'm building
let's say impact Theory every time I say
it I'm going to explain my whole mission
in life is to make sure that nobody gets
to the age of 15 without countering a
growth mindset at scale through ideas
and entertainment okay why does that
matter and then I'll tell them my past
and I tell it in a very animated way why
do I do that because I know that my
brain is going to justify whatever
amplitude of emotion I repeat so if I'm
constantly like you don't understand how
much this matters to me man if I do that
enough it really starts to seep in and
so this is why your books many of your
books have been so instrumental for me
because they're putting their finger on
on these just weird quirks of human
psychology and what I I hope people are
getting out of this is if you understand
what's happening not only can you avoid
the Trap of like sliding down the funnel
into misbelief but you can also go oh I
know how this works I get that my brain
is going to justify these things I'm
going to have an intuition and then a
logical thing is going to come after
that okay I'm going to connect dots
based on feelings that's going to give
me that illusion of explanatory depth
where I think I understand this thing oh
but I don't so cool the the next time I
think I understand something I'm going
to force myself to write it down in a
single sentence or to draw out a
blueprint of a toilet or whatever and
when I realize oh [__] I can't then that
will be further proof I can't trust my
emotions which is one of the things that
I'm trying to get people to understand
you cannot trust your emotions when you
feel you're most convinced that's when
every alarm Bell you have needs to be
going off and because I spend a lot of
time with entrepreneurs I'm always
telling them look the mind works in a
certain way leadership is a certain
thing because the mind works in a
certain way and when you're talking to
your employees you are going to have to
give them certainty you're going to
intoxicate them with certainty we're
going to do this and it's going to yield
this and trust me just get behind me and
execute like a demon and this is all
going to work then you need to go away
and understand you have to challenge
that you have to go find disconfirming
evidence you have to figure out because
you know there's something wrong with
your thesis if there wasn't you would
already be where you plan to be but
you're not and you're not because
there's some piece of this that's
missing and so while externally you have
to project certainty because that's the
way the mind works you also have to
distrust whatever certainty you have in
yourself and call those beliefs into
questions there is a physics to the
human mind and because there is physics
to the human mind there's physics to
groups because those Minds collectively
yeah they act in a certain way and
you've really mapped a lot of this
territory out and and if people can
begin to internalize the lessons like
when I look around and I see people
trusting themselves I'm like Jesus
Christ like I'm jealous I guess a little
bit because I have so much mistrust for
myself but at the same time because I
distrust myself I've actually been able
to go I'm probably wrong about this what
am I missing I'm open to new information
I have uh a high degree of openness to
new
ideas and that's allowed me to
constantly pull myself out of what would
would otherwise be traps to listen to
other people um and getting people there
getting people to distrust themselves to
me is the and look I understand this is
a gross oversimplification but if you
want to avoid the traps of misbelief you
you cannot trust yourself when it feels
right is when you should most be like I
know better than this yeah I know better
I'll give you what one uh one more
anecdote for this we we did study when I
was still at
MIT on simulations for jet
engines so there's all these programs
that do simulations and what we saw was
that the more realistic the simulation
looked it looked like a real engine you
know with in the the graphics the more
people forgot the assumptions that went
into the
model the more something looks real the
more you forget that it's just a fiction
it's based on simulation and so on and
and we we deep fake you know this issue
about what do we trust we we have such
trust in our eyes you know eyewitness
testimony We Trust our memory I mean the
the amount of un uh undeserving trust
that we have in
ourselves uh Vision memory um perception
decisions yeah certainly we need to
question it much more no doubt all right
talk to me about in the social sciences
there is a replication crisis so many of
these things they're amazing and they
feel so right and it lines up with what
I believe one of my favorite stories I
don't think this has anything to do with
you but one of my favorite ones was like
oh if you meet somebody uh and they're
you have a hot mug get them to hold the
hot mug because then they'll think warm
feelings of you I was like a so dope and
then it can't be replicated and so many
things including some of your own
research fails to replicate how do do we
deal with that like this seems to fall
into the same sort of cognitive basket
yeah so so there lots of lots of
different ways to think about it let me
tell you about one uh one example from
mine and kind of through that
so so so we ran an experiment uh on the
Ten Commandments uh we asked people to
recall the Ten
Commandments um or recall 10 books and
then we gave them a task they could
cheat and what we found was that the
people who recall the Ten Commandments
cheated cheated
less okay now there's another group uh
that that tries to replicate this
study and we did it in one place and
they do it in many places they do it in
many places much more serious and so on
now they don't replicate it exactly H
they they make some important
differences um one important difference
is in the cheating task they they use
the same cheating task but with a
slightly different procedure so we had a
task where people could just say I
solved it or not and in their version
they had to Mark the correct answer so
there was a difference in there and and
they run this experiment it doesn't
replicate and they write this paper that
says fail to replicate and and you know
lots of questions why um we asked them
for the data and what they actually did
so as from making the experiment
slightly different but in an important
way they they ran another experiment
before that so you know they ran this
replication effort a lot of people
participated and so
on they said let's replicate two things
at the same time so they ran two
experiments one after the other and the
first experiment annoyed people and it
annoyed them either at the 20% level or
80% level and but when we looked at
their data for for our experiment we
also looked at it as a function of the
first
experiment and guess what it
matters so now they thought they were
replicating our experiment but because
they were running it after another one
they actually changed the results
because when you annoy people people
respond differently to the Ten
Commandments I don't exactly understand
why so um we said look this is an
interesting thing right social science
is complex lots of things happen it
turns out it looks like annoying people
makes the effect of the Ten Commandments
different not something I would expect
but it looks like that so that's just
based on their data so we said okay
let's repeat that let's annoy people and
not annoy people let's test that this is
indeed the case and also because when we
ran the experiment originally it was
2004 we learned a lot since then and
let's add more things to the mix so we
add more things to the mix um do people
need to know the Ten Commandments they
need to believe in them and all kinds of
things like that and and guess what we
find that annoyance matters I don't
exactly understand why but it matters H
we find that the Ten Commandments do
make a difference but it makes a
difference only for the people who
believe that it captures a moral code
you don't have to be in a in that
religion you know judeo-christian
religion but they have to believe that
it captures some kind of moral code
right the people who don't and of course
you know we can't go back to 2004 and
say you know religion has the role of
religion has dropped all kinds of things
have changed in the last in the last 20
years but but anyway here's a
story about
results a failed
replication that actually gets us to
understand something different and now
in retrospect I wouldn't call it a
failed replication I would say that this
was was a a different experiment that
revealed something
else so so I think there is a class like
that where people who do the
replication do something else
important that is different and
experiment before different conditions
all kinds of things like that and it
actually is not negating the results
it's it's about something else so that's
that's one type I don't I'm not saying
it's everything but I think one type is
like is like that M
um I'll in a very different way you know
when I early in my career I spend a lot
of time in the lab and I had people read
instructions on a computer right there
was all kind of computerized
experiments and and my observation was
that people read instructions very
quickly they Press buttons they don't
they don't read and then they get to the
experiment and don't remember the the
experiment and I had my own
procedure um and my procedure was to
read it with them H they I I had a a
secret key that they couldn't press
continue the the continue button was uh
grayed out and they had to to press a a
secret a secret letter and I read to
them the instructions and I had it on a
big screen and I would read it slowly
and at the end of each screen I would
say do you understand and if they said
yes I would say please press on the
letter
and then we would get to the next screen
and all and I made really sure that
everybody understood the
instructions and I had another thing
that that I did I told people I said
look I know you came here for the
experiment you were promised
xll and but if you don't take the
experiment seriously please leave now
I'm happy to pay you but having people
who are not taking it seriously is just
bad for me and so I basically said you
know pay attention and so
on now now most experiments are
happening
online with people who don't see the
experiment nobody's slowing them to read
the
instructions
um we have some ways to test how
seriously people taking the the
experiment and but I think those are
very different ways to run
experiments I think that when people ran
studies with me in the
good old
days I think they paid attention I think
the instructions were clear to them I
think uh they they wanted to work hard I
think they paid more attention it it was
like they were fully engaged I think if
we compare now to a lot of the ways
experiments are run they're run on MK on
the internet where people are at home
you know doing watching TV uh while
paying little attention to the
experiment and it's not clear to me that
those things should should replicate now
now if you think about this from
everything we've we've talked about
today these are not the same
experiments an experiment in which
somebody is engaged and attentive and
caring and paying attention is not the
same as an experiment when somebody is
careless and doing something else at the
same time I'm not saying that one of
them is right and one of them is wrong
but they're they're capturing very
different
environments so there's another class
like this that
things have changed we don't know
exactly to put our fingers on what have
changed but things have changed and I'll
give you one other
example we ran experiments on
dishonesty and in some
Labs um cheating is allowed and there
are some Labs that cheating is not
allowed allowed by who by the experiment
by the people who run the lab so a
why would they allow cheating um so so
psychologists think that
deception um is sometimes unavoidable
yeah you're coming to an experiment on
helping other people you know this
experiment called the good
samarathon either that phrase just is so
familiar that I think I do or so so so
people come to to an experiment and then
you say oh you're late for another
experiment in the other side of the
corridor and please run and they run to
the other side and then they meet
somebody in the middle they don't know
that drops pencils and the question is
do they stop to help him and it turns
out that sometimes they say you run
sometimes you don't run and even when
it's seminar students who just finished
a lecture on the Good Samaritan they
don't stop if they're in a hurry um
that's an experiment that you deceive
people people think they are there for
something else but the goal is something
else and that's what you mean by
cheating yeah um I thought you meant
cheating on the data no no no I I mean
Labs that allow deception Labs that
allow deception um and you know
sometimes it's Justified or not for
example
now I have an experiment that I have
been wanting to run for a while that
that involves
deception um it's an experiment that
compares how much people are willing to
pay for rent versus buying a
house and and the initial results show
that people spend too much on rent and
not enough on buying so imagine you see
a house I say how much would you pay
rental how much would you pay on on
buying now buying is
rental plus an
investment plus some tax and all kinds
of other things um and and the results
in the beginning on on these studies on
the internet show that people um are not
paying enough on buying but these are
not people in the market they might not
understand understand all the
considerations uh so I wanted to have
have an open house on a house that is
not really for
sale and people would come and they
would say hey we didn't decide if to buy
it or to sell it or to rent it please
give us an offer to both but those will
be real people in the market and and the
Ethics Committee said this is
unacceptable this is too much too much
deception then they don't they don't
want me to run this they don't they're
not allowing me to run this experiment
and you know they they get to that's why
we have an Ethics Committee to to help
us figure out what's what's what's an
acceptable um deception for you know
social value and what's what's not but
anyway there are some Labs that allow
deception and some Labs that
don't and um it turns out that you run
experiments in two Labs like this and
things look
different right two Labs that allow
deception a lab a lab that allows
deception and a lab that doesn't
you run experiments in in both of those
the results can be different now do you
think that that is so all these
different things you're walking through
these are what lead to the social
sciences having a replication crisis I
think a lot of it is that like people
um people look at their something not
replicating and said somebody
cheated I think that's the minority of
the
cases there are some there are some
what's called packing there are some
think that somebody ran 10 experiments
two worked out they published the two
that worked out and not the eight that
didn't that's a well-known problem in in
science in general right that we don't
publish no
results but I think a lot of it is that
we haven't really captured the
environment correctly like things like
is the lab allows deception or not is
the experiment in person or online
there's lots of variables that I think
matters a lot and people are
quantifying uh like you know when I
motivated my participants I think they
were much more sensitive to nuances in
description when people don't read the
instructions very carefully of course
the results are going to be weaker so I
think there's lots of things like that
that we think that they are failure to
replicate but in fact they're not
they're just that there's an important
variable that we which people have
changed but we haven't H accounted for
that variable m
okay so one of the criticisms that you
take online centers around one
particular study with data of um mileage
on a car whether you sign up at the top
or at the bottom um it's taken on a life
of its own and I don't know whether to
interpret that through the lens of the
people calling you Geral so it's like
all the sort of craziness over here made
me start discounting this over here um
but I think it warrants a rebuttal what
so given the whole like two different
fonts being used and that supposedly one
font correlates to ones that look like
they're it's using a randomized function
instead of like reality let's let's
let's h a couple of things so first of
all H there was data set from 20072 2008
that was published in
2012 H that two years ago we discovered
was falsified like the the facts are the
facts there's a data set that was
falsified and it was in a paper that I
was the fourth co-author on but
certainly uh in my
paper
ER pointed out to us immediately
retracted also started replicating the
results to see what the results show um
terrible thing right shouldn't happened
shouldn't happened um you know I I uh I
worked on many papers with with many
people
um terrible terrible I wish it never
happened it did it did happen uh just to
be clear I never falsify data I wouldn't
think about it I not part of my Arsenal
um I can go more deeply into it if you
care I also you know you see my hands I
don't even uh it's been years since I I
touch data I try to uh do that but but
anyway um
paper I was connected to um a terrible
outcome
um happily retracted it replicating it
so we you know the the just because the
data was falsified and we retracted the
paper doesn't mean much about is the
result effective or not that data set is
terrible data set but you're replicating
it now yeah yeah yeah yeah when will
that come out I hope soon the paper is
under a second round of review so
hopefully soon and and the results
replicated and of course you know we we
move forward and we can there there are
different types of ways of signing and
some of them work better and worse and
digital versus just checking the box and
and we we kind of Get Much More Much
More nuances into
this and
now now the the the internet storm I
don't know storm but uh you know the
it's it's mostly Twitter and
some people have decided that I
falsified the data um and very hard
to aside from saying look at all my
other papers uh look at everything I do
I don't use my hands and and so on very
very hard to argue that you didn't do
something when when
the how do you prove it happen that your
sister's not a prostitute when you don't
have a sister that's right um so um
I it's it's um so these are these are
largely
academics uh different than the the co
deniers H they also don't use death
threats H
but but I think that the experience with
the co deniers inoculated me to some
degree right the uh the idea that some
here's a very difficult thing that the
idea that some people would hate me no
matter what and that they're not going
to be
convinced is very very tough idea to
accept um and I'm not sure I accepted it
100% but I accepted it to a large to a
large degree to say there some people
that just um have made a decision and
even whether they're academics or not
it's so on it it there's no difference
some people have just made a made a
decision m
so how do you think about that as you're
replicating the experiment knowing
people are going to go through that
thing with a fine tooth comb
um yeah so first of all people have gone
through everything I've done with a fine
tooth for a long time it's not it's not
new um and things have changed a lot
right so that
um that that data set was from 20072
2008 uh science has improved the lot
everything we do now is
pre-registered the data is
online um that that study was collected
with paper and pencil and somebody was
supposed to enter it into a computer now
everything is computerized so so lots of
things have have improved I think the
pre-registration we talked earlier about
how it's good to state in
advance uh what you what you predictable
find and not just uh and exactly how you
go to the data analysis so now the
acceptable standard in in research is
you write in
advance what you expect and also exactly
how you're going to analyze
it and then you just continue and if
you later on come with a new method of
analyzing data you said this was not
pre-registered so it's clear that that's
now a more exploratory andless so no I I
welcome scrutiny and um also
um you know we we both I think uh like
this idea that we don't know and and and
my my pride is completely not connected
with oh falsify data terrible My Pride
is very much connected to that
but whether I'm wrong uh or right like
like let's say let's say this uh one day
somebody will find out that I ran an
experiment and turns out the result is
not corre
correct
um because X Y and Z or because I did it
on a hot day and on a different day it's
this or I did it in um in a religious
place and when you do it in in most of
the world it does whatever it is my ego
is not connected at all to any findings
my my ego is connected to my feeling of
integrity and that I do my best in in
everything but there's no that you say
oh Dan if they found out that finding X
Y doesn't hold or was limited to this
circumstance or something like that I
would say that's great we are we're
learning we're
improving and so on um and and the other
thing that is helping me is I feel that
accusations are it's very easy to make
accusations it's extra easy to make
accusation about something that happens
a long time ago because the harder to to
uh to disprove uh but I think um time is
actually good right so I so somebody
makes an
accusation um and I now take the time to
replicate the study that takes years but
it's fine right we have many years I
still have many years ahead and uh there
are things to fix and it will take some
time to fix but I I feel that in the
long
term uh you know what's what what's
correct will will will show up even
though in the short term it's not the
case it's really interesting there's
something about the way that we're
living our lives in public it's not LW
of me how much of myself is out on the
internet and that as I change it's
inevitable that I'll contradict myself
from years ago and we're the first
generation that are living through this
and then also just people form opinions
you know so the idea of misbelief um um
that it is all too easy for any of us to
have motivated reasoning to um see what
we want to see to not be able to
accurately identify the truth and then
to have that on full display for
millions of people is um it's
interesting it's a very weird thing that
we're going through and I don't know
what the consequences will be very weird
and there's something about like a a
lawyer's approach to things so oh but in
2008 you said
X yeah at a time I thought I thought X
and I learned more since 2008 and maybe
I know something uh different now what
are we interested in are we interested
in finding examples where I change my
mind or learned more or are we
interested in understanding uh the truth
you know or oh but you use that word you
know no no not what I meant and so on
but it's
um I think I think a lot of what is lost
is the presumption of Good
Intentions um so yesterday was the day
of atonement the Yum kipur the
Jewish fasting day and uh I I um the the
thing that I that I contemplated is
whether I'm willing
to I I have a very optimistic view of
the world
I I feel even after everything that's
happened yes you say in the book that it
legitimately impacted your Outlook
that's right it did but but I still have
an optimistic view but not not as much
but
um I I used to think that when things
are going wrong uh there are either
mistakes uh or some wrong beliefs uh but
I didn't think that there was lots of
evil
intentions and that's kind of a big
a big issue right if I think that people
mean well but sometimes they believe
something wrong or but but meaning well
is is incredibly was was kind of my my
my assumption going forward do you think
the people that were legitimately
calling for your execution meant well no
no so not everybody no no I'm saying
preo preo I my belief in the world was
that people mean well for the most
people mean well well for the most spot
um
I I got to believe that less and there
are less people who mean well and there
are more people who you know produce
a fake damaging news for their own
benefit and social signaling and and all
kinds of things right in the in the coid
world um hating me became a currency of
social acceptance right you you want a
bit more likes and a bit more views
um post something uh new about my evil
intentions and that that would get that
would get you social currency um and and
yesterday I was I was debating whether
I um what's my view on on the goodness
of
humanity and whether I'm willing to
reset my
expectations um because when you when
you expect uh good intentions there's
also opportunity for get to get
disappointed um so I thought you know am
I ready am I ready to change my basic
assumption that maybe there's a a large
group that doesn't have good intentions
and they they're different
and and I thought about this the whole
day like you know what what what are my
standards what am I willing to accept
and not accept and what's my working
assumption and and I concluded that I'm
not yet ready to move to that hypothesis
so I'm I I am more is that because you
don't think it's true or because of
something else don't ask me that no I'm
joking it's it's um I think I think it's
I think it's not because I don't I I
think there is there is much more evil
than I I thought and I think it's
increasing and and so on um but
um I'm not fully willing to embrace it
yet as a as a working hypothesis so it's
kind of of the
delusional stage I I I I'm recognizing
it but but I'm not yet ready to to move
to that as being my my the glasses from
which I view the world I think that that
will that could have a it it frightens
me uh to accept a a more negative of of
the world in terms of how it would
influence
my motivation and so on so I'm I'm I'm
I'm not yet accepting it it's really
interesting I tell people you should do
and believe and believe that which moves
you towards your goals
yeah because I look I don't ever want to
intentionally believe something that's
false but identifying what is true is so
difficult yeah that and I if it is
difficult then I would rather if I'm
going to be wrong and I'm just sort of
taking my best guest and I'd rather lean
towards something that moves me towards
where I want to be and if believing that
the world since neither of us really
know like what are the percentages or in
given situations could a bad person do
good it's so
complex maybe you really are better off
it's interesting you and I maybe are
passing on Parallel paths so I used to
have a just fundamental wildly
optimistic everything is going to work
out okay and then coid really um made me
scared for other people I've been
successful enough I wasn't worried about
myself but I was very worried about
other people and the more I pulled back
the curtain on how the world worked
hoping that I could help people that
were really going to struggle through
that time more I realized whoa the world
doesn't work the way that I thought it
did and that there are cabals and there
are
um some conspiracy theories that turn
out to be true and that there are people
that are they want for your downfall and
they will go way out of their way now
that doesn't mean that they can't be
lovely people like they might have a
niece that just adores them and that
they really are legitimately kind and
wonderful to that person and just the
complexity of human nature but um I have
given myself over
to this is a more complicated and
highrisk game than I ever thought but
it's still so beautiful and so I really
want to help people but I feel like the
deey version of me is gone m that I
have I now have a healthy amount of
cynicism it's not I think if you give
into the darkness it's a misconception
first of all you're probably spilling
too far you're going too hard but I was
I had cultivated a naive that I've let
go of and but with the same desire to
help people especially young people MH
um get the right mindset so that they
can really be high functioning in
society but I do I I embrace the the
ideology of a warrior of somebody who is
going to have to enter battle and that
there is going to be Bloodshed and all
of that so so talk to me in a year I I
think I I I can
sense the need for
that shift I'm I'm not ready for it yet
it's a it's a it's a tough transition
transtion yeah it's a tough transition
it's interesting man because you're at a
I'm going to guess you're 50ish 56 oh
[__] wow well congratulations doing very
well
um it's a it's an interesting phase to
hit that do you know um oh God I can't
believe I'm blanking on his name oh he's
so
amazing [__] he just wrote a book with
Oprah Winfrey and I love him to death
and he has sat in that chair Arthur
Brooks do you know Arthur Brooks I don't
oh my God he's got this really
fascinating idea that um people go
through these two major phases in their
life and phase one is like your sharp
your like that young energy of just like
crazy ideas big risks all of that and
then you get to a point in your career
where you don't quite have that like
nent hyper Energy new ideas like the
World produced you you know your 20s and
30s is really sort of the peak of that
sort of creative genius where you and
the world meet at a moment where you're
able to have an Insight that that other
people of an older generation just are
not going to be able to
have but that we all transition into a
wisdom phase he has a way better way of
explaining this uh but you go into where
you're now able to synthesize ideas in a
way that you couldn't before and you're
able to tie things together that you
can't when you're young and so he says
you really do shift into a totally
different phase of your life and most
people can't navigate that moment well
and he tells this just grueling story
about he's on an airplane and he hears
this couple in front of him talking and
old couple like 80s and the man is like
he he can't hear everything he's saying
but the the man says like nobody cares
about me anymore and the woman's like
don't be ridiculous of course people
still care about you and then towards
the end of the flight he says uh I just
wish I were dead and she's like that's
ridiculous like how could you think that
about yourself and so Arthur's like I
got to see like you know this guy
obviously middle manager like he just
never quite like made it to his full
potential and the Heartbreak of
realizing oh I'm too old now and it's
it's all played out and he stands up and
he looks at the guy and it's one of the
most famous people on planet Earth and
he said that guy had accomplished so
much as he walked off the plane people
came out from like the cockpit
everything sir I just had to thank you
you inspired me so much as a kid and so
he was like he has this completely
disorienting moment where he realizes
wait a second if that guy who I admire
half the people on this plane admire
literally just said 20 minutes ago I'd
be better off
dead what am I doing like all the
accomplishment in the world is never
going to get me where I want want to go
and so how do I make sure that I don't
fall prey to that trap so anyway ends up
going and quitting his job completely
switching moving into this new phase of
his life where he's um basically trying
to take advantage of okay I can bring
wisdom together I can really pursue like
what is real happiness and so it'll be
interesting man you've been through such
a crazy Crucible through this whole
thing right at the age where you're
naturally in this sort of big transition
moment you're absolutely right and I
told you in the beginning I'm I'm I'm
thinking now about what's my next uh
what's my next adventure where where
does it take me yeah so yeah I I do I do
feel this you know with this the rest of
my books you know there's always another
irrationality and things to
fix uh this book is different it's it's
kind of a big picture on a on a big on a
big topic and when I
um when it came out last week I left all
the
groups know there was okay I understand
the problem now I can stop that part of
understanding now we need to find
Solutions and so on but it was much more
transition period in this but but yeah
maybe it's something also with the age I
do feel um I do feel there's the next
chapter is is waiting and I just need to
figure out I I'm delaying decisions to
January but January is going to be a
month to figure out the next uh next
chapter we're going to go on another
monthlong hike uh so this year so I I've
been going every every year for a month
in the last six years yeah yeah whoa
yeah yeah by yourself no with two
friends okay always the same two guys H
yeah always old school friends yeah uh
so I started the first year I did with
one friend uh he's he's my best friend
from seventh grade whoa and then another
friend joined us for a few days and
that's the friend that kept on traveling
with us yes but it's been the the three
of us for a while and is it like really
rough or you guys like bougie hikers and
depends on the year um last year we did
the Camino Santiago you know this hike
it's a it's a pilgrim hike in in Spain
800 kilometers we stayed in
in
um we did the high desert took a month a
month yeah wow uh we hiked in the desert
the desert with the beduins you know it
takes it takes about a week to get
so it takes about a week to get to the
paste of this life in which you wake up
in the morning and you just walk the
whole day do you have your cell phone we
do have cell phones the rules are um no
phones from 7:00 a.m. to 700 p.m. wow
okay yeah um the first year was was uh
was really interesting so the first year
um we did the Israel Trail and both me
and Ron grew up in Israel and I had an
online application and we we walked for
30 days we invited people to join us for
some of those days and we accepted
applications from
anybody and lots of people applied and
everybody had to say what they want to
contribute and um so we had a few days
just us a few days we invited like
friends from first grade like we we we
did different period of our lives and
there were quite a few days when we met
random people and the the rules for the
road were um we start the morning
everybody tells an embarrassing story
about themselves uh what said on the
trail stays on the trail and that was a
great Icebreaker and after people said
something personal and
embarrassing um it was great like we we
walked we finished by the way with the
party in the desert that was we invited
some of the people that walked with us
and that was great and since then we try
different things um this year I think
we'll do Croatia that's the that's the
plan um but it's it's about walking
and um when when you spend time with
friends uh face to face the conversation
is very different uh when you spend time
walking and next to each other when you
have the whole day and you have a month
um the conversation is very different
like usually um we don't repeat the same
topic like oh we just finished talking
about this why again when you walk it's
fine like things that bother us are okay
to bring up again and again and rethink
and rehash and try to to understand
things better it's also much easier to
take a few moments and walk by yourself
and think and then come back there's
there's a there's a dynamic of the
communication and the thought process
that is that is
fantastic it's interesting getting
moving the way that it changes the way
that you think getting out of
civilization and yeah having those much
of this book I wrote in the
Alps um I rented a little cottage and
every day I walked up the mountain for
two hours there was a little coffee shop
on the ski lift and I would get there
and I would dictate or write or do
whatever and then walk back and keep on
working in the book and for the two
hours of that it was fixed two hours I
can't do it faster tiny bit faster but
not
really and I would have a topic today I
want to think about this part of this
chapter and sometimes I would have a
solution of how I want it after half an
hour but I still had an hour and a half
so I kept on thinking about it and it
always got better and I think there's
actually there's some really nice
research on how we become more creative
when we move
um but but in addition to that the
forcing myself to have two hours to
think about an idea was very very good
usually I think we have kind of
premature
closure I think I understand this no no
no keep on thinking about it it will get
better a little bit like the illusion of
explanatory depth so I
think and then I would get up and it was
it was wonderful I think I'll adopt it
for the
projects it's really interesting let me
ask you was there something about
something therapeutic about old friends
from like grade
school yeah no question no question
there's the is it helping you access a
different part of your personality what
is
it I I think that a part of it is
trust if you say because you've stayed
in touch with them since then since they
they they know me in my in every aspect
ects of that um so so I this this month
is is good for lots of things uh but but
it's really good to uh ask real question
about where we want to head in life and
and the people that you want on the
other side are people that know you and
you trust so I can you know Ron knows me
from from seventh grade and some Ms he
knows better than I than I do and I can
talk about about everything with with
both trust and and knowledge and it's
it's really quite amazing it's really
quite amazing you know we talk about
resilience and and social networks and
so on I mean
real real social connections yeah and
and of course um it's also improved our
friendship right so we were we were good
friends but spending a month
uh together a year uh has an impact
that's legit for sure yeah you know up
to up to that point um I felt it was
selfish to take time
off like for for many years I I'm a I'm
a very good workaholic I basically work
I'm really good at working uh I know the
feeling yeah um and um and I always felt
guilty I even felt guilty exercising
I have so much email so many people
asking for things like what's the
selfishness of spending an hour you know
doing meditating I can't meditate for
but you know what's the an hour running
where I could answer 17 more emails like
I really felt that that the amount of
things on my plate was so high that how
could I be selfish and um and find time
to
exercise and then I took this this month
and and I don't uh
the rest of my year looks very different
but um it's been it's been really
amazing it's been really amazing and
once I did it I said why did I wait
until age 50 to start why didn't they
start earlier that's really interesting
it's really interesting so have you by
any chance ever done
psychedelics you mean in a legal in a
legal way of course I will assume that
you were wise enough to only yes only
only legal and yes
what is it about so I have not but I'm
very eager to try it what is what is its
utility so I think that the utility is
not about the trip it's about the
transformation and uh since we talked
about this question about life and and
work I I'll tell you about one of
my my first
hallucinations is is a a um
hallucination in which
I'm ER in front of
God and uh big are you a Believer no
interesting but I'm huge huge head curly
if you if you're wondering curly hair
beard um and uh it's clear that I'm
going to be destined for heaven or hell
that's the that's the question and it's
my
judgment and to my happiness I see the
people waiting to be come on the witness
stands and I
see um my mother and my sisters and my
wife and my daughter all the women in my
life
are are waiting for to be on the witness
stand and I sigh I'm I'm very happy
because you know they're all on my side
how can this go wrong and then they get
on the witness stand and they all and
they all say how I never had time for
them wow everyone says I don't have time
I always prefer work
uh that I can get a call
from somebody in Africa and I and I go
but if somebody needs me at home
I anyway it looks blicker and blicker as
things uh
progress and then it's my turn to to
plead for my uh things
and
I don't know how I was so creative but I
was
creative and I basically says I I I
evoke I evoke Nelson
Mandela and I say to God think of Nelson
Mandela he was not home for like 30
years now I'm not Nelson Mandela by far
but I also wasn't not home for 30 years
so I basically make the argument
that um not everybody is destined to
be standard the spouse and father and so
on we all have a different set of skills
and and calling and and we each needs to
navigate our own our own path and and we
shouldn't be hold to the average
standard that's just not right and you
know with Nelson Mandela I said to God
look God you wouldn't have wanted him to
do anything else he was this what a
remarkable human being like one of the
few people who change you know the
trajectory of the world with his world
again completely arrogant to to invoke
him but but still that
was that was the case and
um and and the amazing thing about this
is that after this was
over um I
felt less
guilty I I resolved that problem so
again it's not about the the specific
it's about the
transition now if you think about this
this is a metaphor I think that what's
for me at least what happened is
that there's all kinds of things I I
debate with Within
Myself um and and these things help me
make make decisions or I'll give you
another
example H we've all said I never want to
work with [__] again we've all said
it um and and one experience I had
included that exactly
um one of my startups something happened
between two people I felt that there was
somebody who really misbehaved toward
another another person I I felt terrible
about this um and I had an experience
that about this thing
and and when it ended I came to this
conclusion like everybody has come to
this conclusion it's not new
but under that condition I had the force
to actually follow through to stop
project to ask people to leave to do all
kinds of things like that so I think I
think it is about the the
transformation you want so I wouldn't do
it for
fun but I think it's about um figuring
out what is not
working how we want to solve it and
getting the conviction to actually
follow through that's that's somebody
that knows as much about the brain and
psychology as you what's going on is it
is it taking off those normal distorted
glasses and giving you just a radically
different perspective and all of a
sudden you have Clarity so so we have
this thing called the default Network M
and the default Network basically is a
network that quiets the brain and um and
these these substances lstd mushrooms I
mean different ones that work
differently but LSD and mushrooms
basically quiet the default Network and
what it means is that different parts of
your brain start talking to each other
more
directly right and and remember uh the
way that neurons work once two neurons
start talking to each other it
strengthen the relationship between them
not not just at the moment right the
word that if you think about how the
most of the activity is not in the
neural it's the connection between them
but once you strengthen a connection
that connection becomes stronger right
it it will continue to be like this it
might Decay later but but for a while it
it would get stronger so what happened
is that the default Network quies down
and the areas of the brain start
communicating with each other and and
for me that means that we get
associations that we usually don't get
that this part of your memory can talk
to another part of your memory and the
auditory cortex can can be connected to
something else or our ability to to
think and to think creatively is is
enhanced emotions can be more connected
so that's really what's
happening and um and again the
experience can be good or can experience
be bad and when the experience is most
of my
experiences like you know this thing
about being in front of God even though
he agreed with me at the end I wouldn't
have called it a good experience but it
was
transformative and and I think most of
you know other people have different
experiences but I think for me that's
the that's the main reason the main
reason is to say I I have a problem that
is complex and difficult and I'm not
sure what to do and I've been debating
it for a while and not and and this is a
a very very useful way to to make this a
transformative decision
I love that where can people follow you
the best place is my website dani.com
and um yeah that's it all right well
people I highly encourage you to read
his books few things have had a bigger
impact on the way that I view my own
mind uh and speaking of things that will
change how you view your own mind if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace if you enjoyed this
episode check out this deep convers
ation with Donald Hoffman about reality
and Consciousness what we are are
avatars of the one the one awareness is
exploring all of its possibilities
through different avatars so somehow
there is this field of
awareness